Passage number 1.
] CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The meeting will come to order. We need approval of the minutes for [the previous] two meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the meeting needs approval of the minutes for the previous two meetings.


Passage number 2.
 If anyone would like to so move-- MR. MAYO. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Both statements are in agreement with each other.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we shall approve the minutes of the two meetings. M r .  Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection" indicates that there is unanimous agreement among the participants.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 4.
 MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention in the passage because the speaker, Mr. Pardee, is making a statement which suggests that there is a disagreement or conflicting viewpoints regarding the topic being discussed.


Passage number 5.
] MR. BLACK. Scott, you said that the only thing the foreigners thought we had going for us was our monetary policy. Do you mean in the short run. Do they not see the improvement in the balance of payments that has been projected by the staff. M R .  PARDEE. They see the projections. They’ve seen the projections over the last few years--the forecast of an improvement on our trade and current accounts and improvement in our inflation picture. And they’re still waiting to see when it will come.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Black and Mr. Pardee are discussing the views of foreigners regarding the improvement in the balance of payments and inflation picture. They are discussing the same topic without expressing opposing views.


Passage number 6.
 MR. BLACK. They don‘t believe it, in short.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that "they" (whoever "they" refers to) do not believe something.


Passage number 7.
 MR. PARDEE. They believe it will come sooner or later, but they’re not going to bet on it. M R .  WALLICH. Do you think they’re looking beyond the present cycle toward a more distant future in evaluating the improvement in the current account, which is cyclical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing the beliefs and perspectives of a group of individuals.


Passage number 8.
 MR. PARDEE. Well, again, there’s the oil price situation and the Iranian situation. Any forecast one would normally make would be positive for the dollar, but people are not willing to bet on that forecast given the uncertainties in the oil area and the Iranian situation. M R .  WALLICH. Do you see any important central bank constraint in the use of the dollar for intervention purposes because of not wanting to do damage to the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers are discussing the potential impact of various factors on the value of the dollar.


Passage number 9.
 MR. PARDEE. They’ve talked of it a little but I don‘t see [a lot of that]. The Swiss National Bank has been careful not to sell dollars this time around. Remember, back in August their selling of dollars was one of the elements that triggered the adverse market sentiment. They finally decided that the Swiss franc had gotten so weak that they would start selling dollars; the first time they showed 1 1 / 2 0 / 7 9  -2- themselves in the market then, the market moved away from them very quickly so they actually did not sell any dollars. But they're being much more cautious this time around than they were back in August in selling dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply provides information about the actions of the Swiss National Bank in relation to selling dollars.


Passage number 10.
 MR. WALLICH. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is expressing gratitude.


Passage number 11.
 MR. COLDWELL. Scott, do you see any further rate changes on the horizon abroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking for Scott's opinion on rate changes.


Passage number 12.
 MR. PARDEE. Interest rates. I would pray that I wouldn't but they face some of the same inflationary pressures we do. The oil price has continued to move up. Many of these countries buy their oil in the spot markets, and to the extent that spot prices have continued to rise this fall it's possible that they will have further inflation feeding into their economies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is reporting on the potential impact of rising oil prices on interest rates in certain countries. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 13.
 So-- MR. COLDWELL. Well, I recognize the fundamentals argument. My question was really about the near term. Are you seeing or hearing any noises about changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the fundamentals argument and then asks a question about the near term.


Passage number 14.
 MR. PARDEE. That's why I say I would pray that [the answer is no] for the time being since everybody has raised their interest rates--the Germans, the Japanese, the Swiss, the British, the Canadians, and I'm not sure how many more--since October 6 .  The Greenbook has a list. I would hope that they're all done for the time being--for the rest of this year. But the fundamentals are still a problem. M R .  EASTBURN. Scott, how understanding would they be of a decline in interest rates here. If the economy weakens substantially, would they understand that. M R .  PARDEE. If '"they" is the central bankers, they might understand it or explain it. What has happened so far--the backing off of the funds rates and some moving back of [other] interest rates from the peaks in mid-October--has been taken in stride probably both by the central bankers and the markets. But there is some sort of trigger point where people will begin to wonder whether we have lost our resolve. I don't think that has happened up to this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The conversation is primarily a discussion between Mr. Pardee and Mr. Eastburn about the impact of interest rates on the economy and how other central bankers and markets might perceive a decline in interest rates. There is no clear disagreement or argument between the speakers.


Passage number 15.
 MR. BLACK. Suppose that is accompanied by a clear control over the aggregates. Would they have pretty much the same reaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple hypothetical question posed by Mr. Black.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 16.
 MR. PARDEE. Not everybody has the same perception of what our control over the aggregates is. It's the reading of the economy and the economy is softening. Surely if we could get better control of the aggregates as well, some people would say that's fine, the Federal Reserve is doing its job. AS long as inflation remains very high there are still the real interest rate arguments. Most Europeans believe that interest rates have to be positive in real terms in order for monetary policy to have an effect; and many people in the exchange market believe that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "Most Europeans believe that interest rates have to be positive in real terms in order for monetary policy to have an effect; and many people in the exchange market believe that..." indicates different beliefs or perspectives on the effectiveness of monetary policy and the ideal real interest rates.


Passage number 17.
 MR. WALLICH. Could I just say a word on this. At the last Economic Policy Committee meeting at the OECD, from which Charlie Schultz and I have just returned, the United States made a long presentation [on U.S. economic and financial developments], including 11/20/79 -3- our domestic monetary policy. Charlie and I got just three questions on this. The only subject of these three question was this: What is going to happen when the aggregates and the economy slow. Are you going to let interest rates go down. We, of course, gave the standard answer: that when inflation comes down, the money supply slows and the economy slows and then it will be appropriate for interest rates to come down. I don't know what the reactions were; there wasn't any come-back on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply describing a presentation and answering a question.


Passage number 18.
 MR. BLACK. It sounds as if they accepted that as a reasonable outcome. M R .  WALLICH. They're not stupid. I think they have to accept it as reasonable, but they also figure that it means there will be dollar weakness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Black and Mr. Wallich agree that the outcome mentioned is reasonable and likely to result in dollar weakness.


Passage number 19.
 MR. BLACK. They're hoping the aggregates will slow and interest rates will remain high--both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a hope or expectation regarding the aggregates and interest rates.


Passage number 20.
 MR. WALLICH. I think inflation coming down will be the most convincing single thing but unfortunately we're locked into a CPI that has certain lagged features from mortgage rates and from energy. So one can't promise anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Wallich about the potential impact of inflation coming down.


Passage number 21.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have any recommendations with respect to operations, Mr. Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if Mr. Pardee has any recommendations regarding operations.


Passage number 22.
 MR. PARDEE. I have two, one with respect to current operations and one with respect to the swap arrangements themselves. Between now and December 28 we have eleven swap drawings for 1 billion 654 million dollars coming due with the Bundesbank. These are all first renewals and need no formal action by the Committee. A second renewal--and this is the first one in all of these operations we've taken since last June--for 88 million dollars equivalent will be coming up in that time span. I will need Committee approval for that now so I can renew it should we not have the opportunity to repay it by that time. That is my first recommendation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply presenting information and a recommendation.


Passage number 23.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. It is a simple request for comments without stating any particular opinion or taking a stand on a specific issue.


Passage number 24.
 MS. TEETERS. It's 88 million dollars with whom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not involve any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states a numerical figure.


Passage number 25.
 MR. PARDEE. The Bundesbank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information that suggests there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 26.
 MS. TEETERS. All these are with the Bundesbank. M R .  PARDEE. Oh, yes. Those are the only swaps we have outstanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 27.
 MR. MAYO. SO moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "SO moved" indicates agreement or approval, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 28.
 MR. KIMBREL. Scott, you [requested Committee approval of a renewal] in the event you do not have an opportunity to repay it. Are you optimistic on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 29.
 MR. PARDEE. Well, during the last month the Bundesbank has been very helpful in channeling marks to us from their non-market transactions. That's how we have been able to repay the 300 odd 11/20/79 -4- million dollars worth of swaps. If the Iranian situation quiets down and we can resume these kinds of operations, the 88 million dollars is at the head o E  the list to be repaid. We try to repay the longest maturity first, so I would hope by that time we will have repaid it. But [if not], this would be a second renewal and that is always one that requires Committee action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the actions that have been taken and the plan for repayment.


Passage number 30.
 MR. KIMBREL. I second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a straightforward statement that Mr. Kimbrel is seconding something without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 31.
 MR. WALLICH. I share Scott‘s view on the present situation as to how we should proceed. I continue to think that if things quiet down and we get halfway stable markets, we ought to make it a routine to buy a few tens of millions a week or a few million a day, letting the market see that these are routine transactions in order to repay [swap drawings]. So we get [marks] on that basis without always frightening the market when we move in--having the market think that we’re trying to cap the rate at that level. But I would agree with Scott that until the Iranian situation settles down, this isn’t the time to start such a policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers agree that it is not the right time to implement a particular policy.


Passage number 32.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we shall approve it. Now you have another recommendation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. The phrase "without objection" indicates that there is no disagreement or opposition from anyone present.


Passage number 33.
 MR. PARDEE. Yes. Between now and December 28 all of the swap arrangements themselves mature. We have arrangements with 14 central banks and the BIS and I simply recommend that I be authorized to renew them all as they stand. As you recall, last year we entered into extensive discussions with the Bundesbank over eliminating the 50-50 even sharing of risk clause on our drawings. [That was to be done] in exchange for shifting to the use of their interest rates rather than ours on the investment oE the dollars that arise out of our drawings. There is still much to be said for the change and we found at that time that the U.S. Treasury agrees in principle, but the Treasury is still reluctant to make the change, particularly now given that we are heavily in debt to the Bundesbank once again. Up to this point the Germans have not pressed the issue this time around. I would hope we can wait for a more opportune time. So I’d rather renew the swaps strictly as they are without any change and review the 50-50 problem at a more opportune time. That is my recommendation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains a recommendation made by Mr. Pardee regarding the renewal of swap arrangements.


Passage number 34.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion. If not, we need a motion. I guess we need a motion before the discussion. SPEAKER(.). So move. SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is purely procedural and does not involve any disagreement or contention. The speakers are simply discussing the need for a motion before starting a discussion, and one speaker makes a motion and another seconds it.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any objections. If not, we will approve it. Having approved recommendations for the future, we better ratify the transactions for the past. Do I have a motion to that effect. SPEAKER ( .) . So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement seeking approval and confirmation.


Passage number 36.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no objections, we shall approve them. I’d like to say that the question has arisen as to whether the Japanese--the yen has been weak, as you know--may want to draw on their swap [line with us]. We have given them a preliminary indication that in a moderate amount of, say, $ 3 0 0  million that would 11/20/79 -5- be all right. I don‘t know if they will draw or not because the yen has strengthened a bit; I don‘t know whether there’s been any subsequent strengthening. It‘s the other side of the Iranian situation; I suppose that‘s the reason it has strengthened. So I don’t know what sense of urgency there is now. Do you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and expressing uncertainty about whether the Japanese will draw on their swap line due to the strengthening yen.


Passage number 37.
 MR. PARDEE. Well, they’ve seen some turn in their capital accounts. They‘re hoping that their trade account will turn later this year, just as a sort of very short-term bridge. They are still discussing other measures they might take if they need to on various capital controls. And they thanked us very much; they are grateful that we have agreed in principle on the swap drawing and they will be back to us if they need it. They don’t need the money; it’s just the question of having this gesture of cooperation from the United States authority at a moment of a little bit of isolation for them. Theirs is the only currency other than the dollar that has been heavily sold in this experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an update on a situation and expressing gratitude for the cooperation of the United States authority.


Passage number 38.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have something like in reserves as I recall, so they’re not exactly out of money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the subject has some money in reserves, indicating that they are not completely devoid of funds.


Passage number 39.
 MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage you mentioned, I am unable to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Could you please provide more information or the relevant passage?


Passage number 40.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it has been offered; whether it will be used, I don’t know. Mr. Sternlight. M R .  STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about whether something will be used or not.


Passage number 41.
] MR. KIMBREL. Peter, if those two [dealer firms] are deleted, you’ll have a net number of trading firms then of--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by an individual named Mr. Kimbrel.


Passage number 42.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that would make it 34 or 35 or something close to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Sternlight's opinion about a number without any opposing statements or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 43.
 MR. PARTEE. You do business with 35.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact about doing business with 35.


Passage number 44.
 MR. STERNLIGHT.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. However, it is difficult to provide a more accurate answer without the actual passage being referenced for analysis.


Passage number 45.
 Yes MR. PARTEE. With everyone on the list you have some activity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing information about a list with some activity.


Passage number 46.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there are a couple of firms that have been added to the reporting list with whom we do not yet trade. One that was added several years ago but hasn’t quite brought itself to sufficient volume for us to trade with is the Crocker Bank. Also, Smith Barney was added to the reporting list just a few months ago and it is getting very close to the point of having a trading relationship. M R .  KIMBREL. What is the split between banks and nonbanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is merely a conversation between Mr. Sternlight and Mr. Kimbrel discussing the addition of certain firms to a reporting list and their potential for future trading relationships.


Passage number 47.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. About 1/3 of them are banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement about 1/3 of them being banks is presented as a straightforward fact without any conflicting opinions or contrasting arguments.


Passage number 48.
 11/20/79 -6- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other discussion. Is there a motion to approve the transactions. SPEAKER(.). So moved. SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The first speaker makes a motion to approve the transactions and the second speaker seconds the motion.


Passage number 49.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they are approved. We have Mr. Truman and Mr. Kichline on the economic situation today--the [extended] horizons of the American economy. Mr. Truman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "without objection, they are approved" suggests that there is general agreement and approval of the speakers.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 50.
 MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 51.
] CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming about the oil price decision in December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any assumption or imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 52.
 MR. TRUMAN. We are assuming that some of it has already been taken and essentially that we're going to get a 20 percent increase in December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making an assumption and stating it as fact, without any opposing viewpoints or disagreement being presented.


Passage number 53.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You said a 23 percent increase or something from this December to next December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker simply mentions a percentage increase without expressing any contrasting viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 54.
 MR. TRUMAN. That's for oil imports. Our actual oil import prices are reflecting the higher spot prices that are now occurring and there will be a convergence--spot prices will come down. So we're getting in the oil import prices in this quarter, as we had even last quarter, essentially the anticipation of the oil price increase reflected in the spot market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. In fact, the passage is explaining that oil import prices are reflecting the currently higher spot prices and predicting that spot prices will come down in the future.


Passage number 55.
 MR. KIMBREL. Ted, the dollar amount then in tbis last quarter actually would average out to about what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a straightforward statement of the dollar amount in the last quarter.


Passage number 56.
 MR. TRUMAN. This last quarter we have a $23/bsrrel assumption for the import price.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply presenting a fact or assumption about the import price.


Passage number 57.
 But that's very much higher than the official posted prices, let me say, of the OPEC countries even with the increase that they've had, because of spot-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming, say, in February or March for import prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only presents a statement regarding the price difference between the unofficial price mentioned and the official posted prices of OPEC countries. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 58.
 MR. TRUMAN. Well, the price goes up at about a 10 percent annual rate after the first part of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a fact without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 59.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So you're not assuming much impact in December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that there is not much expected impact in December.


Passage number 60.
 MR. TRUMAN. We're assuming 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, there is no indication of any contention or disagreement. The statement made by Mr. Truman is presented without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 61.
 MR. PARTEE. You said after the first part of the year it's about 10 percent. So you have a 20 percent [increase] and then a drifting up from that point. M R .  TRUMAN. AS far as the OPEC contract prices, we have a 20 percent increase on the first of January and then 10 percent across the year. When you translate that into our import prices, that translates into a 23 percent increase fourth quarter over fourth quarter. That's because the spot market activity will be [reflecting] 1 1 / 2 0 / 7 9  -7- some of the OPEC price increase--in effect, the official contract prices--in this quarter as it did last quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 62.
 MR. COLDWELL. So you’re looking at a price of about $30 a barrel. M R .  TRUMAN. About $28 a barrel; we have $28-1/4 in the fourth quarter of next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Coldwell and Mr. Truman are discussing the price of oil per barrel, but they have slightly different estimates, with Mr. Coldwell suggesting $30 and Mr. Truman mentioning it would be around $28-1/4. However, this does not indicate a disagreement or argument between them.


Passage number 63.
 MR. PARTEE. Is your fourth quarter of 1979 price higher than you had before, too. M R .  TRUMAN. Yes, by about 10 percent. Another way of characterizing it, although I decided not to put it into this little story, is that a couple months ago we essentially had assumed that the real price of oil was going to be unchanged in 1980. Now we are assuming, in effect, that the real price of oil will increase by 20 percent. So, for the fourth quarter of 1980 the price is now 20 percent higher than we had assumed. I’m not sure if that helps. M R .  PARTEE. That certainly wipes out any monetary policy effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are simply providing information and expressing agreement with each other's statements.


Passage number 64.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will be fortunate if it is that small.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a positive outlook by using the word "fortunate" to emphasize that a small size would be a favorable outcome.


Passage number 65.
 MR. PARTEE. Right, that’s what he said. M R .  WALLICH. On the other hand, not to seek to achieve a monetary policy effect would just mean that that effect would be all the bigger. M R .  PARTEE. It‘s a large increase. M R .  TRUMAN. Shall I continue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers are simply discussing different aspects or consequences of a monetary policy decision. They are not opposing each other's views or arguing against each other.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 66.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Proceed. M R .  TRUMAN. [Statement continued.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough context to determine the exact nature of the contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 67.
] CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question. You say the current account is essentially in a zero position this year. In the way we used to calculate the current account a couple years ago it would be what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 
Explanation: There is disagreement or contention in the passage because one person is questioning the statement made by another person. The person is asking about the calculation method used and implying that there may be a different result under a different calculation method.


Passage number 68.
 MR. TRUMAN. It would be minus about $15 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 69.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It’s a $15 billion difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a numerical difference without any indication of conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 70.
 MR. TRUMAN. The improvement between the two years, rather than being $14 billion, is approximately $8 billion. So you still have the significant improvement in the level no matter which way you calculate it. M R .  KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.] M R .  COLDWELL. Jim, suppose your presumption is incorrect-- that both you and Ted have misgauged [the oil price outlookl--and the OPEC price goes up something like 40 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing and analyzing figures related to an improvement in a certain level, but they are not contradicting each other or presenting conflicting opinions.


Passage number 71.
 11/20/79 -8- MR. KICHLINE. Well, in that case, we’d be talking about adding another quarter or half point to the deflator and I would think taking at least something comparable, if not more, out of the real side. And in the short run 1 think there is quite a rapid passthrough now of these costs. We’d get some lag effects obviously into 1980 and 1981, but we do get fairly immediately a rapid increase in prices. M R .  COLDWELL. So if there were to be something like a 40 percent increase in the [oil] price level coming out of the December OPEC [meeting], you’d expect this to be hitting the first half of 1980. M R .  KICHLINE. We‘d expect a good chunk of it to hit in the first half, but [the effect] carries on. In the current forecast, which has an increase of roughly half that size, we have-- M R .  COLDWELL. That’s why I doubled it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing the potential effects of an increase in oil prices and are in agreement about the potential impact on prices and the timing of that impact.


Passage number 72.
 MR. KICHLINE. We think our forecast is likely to entail something like a 3/4 percentage point increase in personal consumption prices. That is in addition to the other things going on in the energy area, of which there are many. If we were to assume roughly symmetrical effects, we’d double that, so it gets into the 1-1/2 percent area. So we would see fairly promptly--namely, in the first half--a substantial increase. That is a very bearish outlook and hopefully one that won’t come to pass. Even if we have some supply side effects in terms of constraining consumption, it seems to me that you’re talking about a poor outcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kichline, is expressing his own viewpoint and outlook on personal consumption prices and the potential increase in the first half. While he hopes for a more positive outcome, there is no indication of a disagreement or conflicting viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 73.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I’m a little confused. Are you saying a 40 percent increase in imported oil prices will bring a 1-1/2 percent increase in GNP prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses confusion about the relationship between a 40 percent increase in imported oil prices and a 1-1/2 percent increase in GNP prices. This suggests a disagreement or lack of agreement on the impact of oil prices on GNP prices.


Passage number 74.
 MR. KICHLINE. In 1980, right. M R .  COLDWELL. Over and above what he already has. M R .  KICHLINE. No, that’s the total effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers seem to be in agreement that the total effect in 1980 is what Mr. Kichline already has.


Passage number 75.
 MS. TEETERS. It’s 3/4 point for 20 percent. M R .  COLDWELL. 3/4 point in addition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple exchange of information.


Passage number 76.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What percentage of the GNP is oil now. m. KICHLINE. I don’t know. The deflators in the energy sector in GNP are about 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not know the percentage of the GNP that is oil, and provides information about the deflators in the energy sector, which is unrelated to the question asked.


Passage number 77.
 MS. TEETERS. Ted, am I right that you rather markedly changed your outlook for [growth in] foreign economies, mainly because of the higher oil prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 78.
 MR. TRUMAN. Yes. We have marked it down quite remarkably. We essentially have real growth over the next four quarters of 1-1/2 percent, which is slow growth. Only in one of the major countries do we have what we call a recession, or negative growth. But we have [economic activity in] all the major countries dropping down-- essentially growing at half the rate over the next four quarters that 11/20/79 -9- they had over the previous four quarters. And the last four quarters have been affected to some extent by the oil prices in 1979. So we have a sluggish outlook abroad. And the improvement in the current account or the trade balance is very small in terms of volume. I don’t think there is much increase in the volume of exports from here on in. But the fact is--if I may put it this way--that if our prices are going to go up 10 percent, that means we’re going to get something like a 12 or 13 percent increase in the value of exports at a time when the value of our imports stagnates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting information about projected economic growth and trade balance without expressing any disagreement or contradictory viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 79.
 That’s where we get the improvement in the-- MS. TEETERS. But you were counting on [the economies of] our trading partners growing at 3 to 4 percent next year and on that helping our balance of payments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is contention or disagreement. The speaker mentions that they were counting on the trading partners growing at 3 to 4 percent next year and that it would benefit their balance of payments. However, Ms. Teeters seems to have a different perspective or disagreement, but her response is cut off, so the extent of her contention is not clear.


Passage number 80.
 MR. TRUMAN. Well, that was some time ago. A forecast of 3 percent was reasonable at the beginning of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Truman about a forecast made earlier in the year.


Passage number 81.
 MS. TEETERS. But now their [expected growth is] down almost to that danger point where they could tip into a recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about expected growth and the possibility of a recession.


Passage number 82.
 MR. TRUMAN. It is at the point at which it may be somewhat arbitrary [whether we call it a small positive or small negative]. Sluggish growth is the way I’d say it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any statement that can be considered as contentious or involving disagreement. It simply offers an opinion or interpretation about a topic without conflicting views.


Passage number 83.
 MS. TEETERS. So the possibility does exist that we could get a worldwide recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any indication of disagreement or contention. The statement is simply about the possibility of a worldwide recession.


Passage number 84.
 MR. TRUMAN. Yes, and if you add in the United States with our forecasts--[unintelligible] others which are less pessimistic, let me put it that way--growth for the QECD area, including the United States, is about zero. It’s minus 1-112 percent here and plus 1-1/2 percent there; and we’re about half or 40 percent of the total, so it’s essentially zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and calculations about the growth forecast for the QECD area, including the United States. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 85.
 MS. TEETERS. We’ve never managed to grow at 1 to 1-1/2 percent without sliding into a recession. Have the others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement from Ms. Teeters without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 86.
 MR. TRUMAN. Well, in the rest of the world, other major industrial countries--with the exception of the oil crisis--have not had recessions in the postwar period. They‘ve had growth recessions, but they’ve not had negative growth or recessions. S o  there is really no comparable experience with the exception of the United Kingdom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information about the economic situation in major industrial countries. There is no conflicting opinion or argument being presented.


Passage number 87.
 MR. WALLICH. You know, this discussion does not really reflect what went on.at the QECD meeting. The numbers are roughly the same but there was not a great sense of pessimism and not a sense of world recession. Rather there was a mild degree of feeling that it was good to have economies desynchronized instead of having the cycle moving synchronously everywhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their perspective on the discussion that took place at the QECD meeting. They are describing the overall sentiment as not being pessimistic or indicating a world recession, but rather a mild degree of satisfaction with having desynchronized economies.


Passage number 88.
 MR. TRUMAN. Henry, let me correct you on that. Our forecasts are lower than the OECD forecasts in large part because they essentially were dealing with our old oil price assumption of no increase in the real price of oil in 1980. So we have a very different outlook. Their forecast is close to 2 percent for the same G-10 countries, whereas ours is close to 1-112 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining the difference between the forecasts of MR. Truman and OECD, specifically regarding the real price of oil in 1980. There is no contention or disagreement stated in the passage.


Passage number 89.
 11 / 2 0 / 7 9 -10- MR. WALLICH. I know, but by the time this discussion took place the recent increases were known so that was reflected in the conversation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the timing of a discussion and how recent increases were already known at that time.


Passage number 90.
 MR. TRUMAN. True, but I would comment that within the U.S. government, for example, people are only now in the process of focusing on the implications of the [outlook for] oil prices. And I think the same is true for most other countries’ forecasts; they have not looked at their official forecasts since July. They‘re now looking at them and when they finish, I think they will end up with a much more bearish picture than they had a few weeks ago. That’s somewhat of a hypothesis but I think that‘s what is happening. It’s fair to say that that is the process that we went through over the last four weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Truman is expressing his observation and opinion about the current focus and outlook on oil prices within the U.S. government and most other countries.


Passage number 91.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. Did I understand you to say that you are expecting essentially an equivalent move in the consumer price index for these countries, from a 9 percent rate of increase to 7 percent. M R .  TRUMAN. This quarter in round numbers it‘s 9-1/4 percent; a year from now it’s 7-1/2 percent. It looks like their consumer price inflation rate peaked last quarter at 11 percent plus. [We expect] some moderation. And they don‘t have the assistance of housing costs and things like that on their consumer price index.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple conversation where Mr. Truman provides information about the expected consumer price inflation rate for the mentioned countries.


Passage number 92.
 MR. PARTEE. You’ve taken into account the higher oil price increase in doing that. M R .  TRUMAN. We tried to, let’s put it that way. The forecasts are all supposed to be consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response of "We tried to, let's put it that way" suggests an attempt to factor in the higher oil price increase, indicating a willingness to address potential challenges without outright disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 93.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 1 still don’t understand this oil price business. If the weight is 8 percent and you get a 40 percent [price] increase, that’s more than 3 percent of GNP. Why doesn’t it have a 3 percent impact on GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage suggests that there is a lack of understanding regarding the impact of oil price increase on GNP. The speaker raises the question of why a 40% price increase in oil does not lead to a 3% impact on GNP, indicating a potential disagreement or confusion about the relationship between oil prices and their economic impact.


Passage number 94.
 MR. KICHLINE. What I was quoting was energy prices. We forecast the energy price deflator, which aside from imported oil includes domestic oil, coal, and natural gas prices. When you put that all together, you find that domestic prices would tend to be rising more rapidly as time goes on because of the decontrol. But next year, unless a change is made, it seems that the Alaskan oil will bump against the ceiling. So Alaskan oil will be constrained in its upward price movement. Natural gas supplies are abundant right now. Pricing there is permitted to go higher with increasing inflation, but in fact the market for natural gas is fairly weak and natural gas is readily available, so we have held down the price increases in that area. And the coal market is very weak. S o ,  I don’t know right off the top of my head how to translate imported oil into the PCE deflator context. Do you Jerry. We can provide a memo to the Committee, if you like, on the energy sector and its price implications. That might help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and discussing the pricing trends in the energy sector.


Passage number 95.
 MR. WALLICH. Imported oil is about 3 percent of GNP. Imported oil is half of our total oil [consumption], isn’t it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact and asks for confirmation.


Passage number 96.
 11/20/79 -11- MR. TRUMAN. Yes. But the point is, as Jim explained, some prices move with imported oil and some prices move partially with imported oil, and one has to add all those things up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that there are different factors at play when it comes to prices, some of which are connected to imported oil.


Passage number 97.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You still haven’t included any indirect effects. M R .  KICHLINE. That‘s right. And in our forecasting exercise they carry well into 1981.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement and a confirmation of a fact between two individuals.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 98.
 MR. PARTEE. With respect to Governor Coldwell‘s question, in your additive process you haven’t really included any dynamics in the business effects. That is, there must be a point at which another 3/4 percentage point decline in real consumption would have a material impact on inventories and capital spending that would run through the economy in an accelerated way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in this passage. The phrase "With respect to Governor Coldwell's question, in your additive process" implies that there is a disagreement or differing opinion being addressed. Additionally, the statement "you haven't really included any dynamics in the business effects" suggests a disagreement about the thoroughness or accuracy of the analysis being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 99.
 MR. KICHLINE. That’s right. The 3/4 point effect, for example, this year did not carry through fully to our price forecast. It’s roughly 1/2 percent. So we have weaker activity as a result of higher world oil prices and in fact we assume that‘s going to have an impact in other areas in the domestic economy. M R .  WILLES. Now I’m confused--not that I wasn‘t before. I thought that when you calculated the U.S. deflator the price of imported goods [always] came in with a negative sign.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kichline and Mr. Willes seem to have different understandings or assumptions about how higher world oil prices will impact the domestic economy and the calculation of the U.S. deflator. Mr. Kichline suggests that higher oil prices will have a negative impact on the domestic economy, while Mr. Willes expresses confusion and questions the assumption that the price of imported goods always comes in with a negative sign in the calculation of the U.S. deflator.


Passage number 100.
 MR. KICHLINE. It does. M R .  WILLES. That means that if the price of imported oil is going up relatively fast, that can have a strong impact on the CPI but it‘s not at all clear that it will have a direct impact on the deflator. M R .  KICHLINE. I was referring to the personal consumption expenditure deflator. It gets measured there directly and subtracted out when we look at the difference in export and import prices. So the deflator will always understate the effect--the price impact--on consumers of rapid increases in foreign prices. When we look at the personal consumption area or the CPI, as you mentioned, we‘re going to get the full effect. M R .  WINN. My own feelings are perhaps more pessimistic for ‘80 than yours, for different reasons. I wonder in terms of our current analysis how much allowance we should make for the shock effect aspect [of developments in the energy areal. For example, when we had our [earlier] energy shock, it wasn’t really the price but the [concern about] availability that caused people to back off. It then picked up substantially. [I wonder] how much shock effect we’ll be getting in behavior for the moment and to what extent that may [erode] because availability is really not affected though price certainly has been in the real sense of the term. So perhaps some of the momentum we‘ve seen will pick up again. we have the seasonal [issue] of Christmas and then [the question o f ]  how much change in attitudes might be expected out of that kind of [energy price] development. On the other side, we know that the shock effect [from] October 6 caused construction--in terms 11/20/79 -12- of new starts--to turn off completely. That doesn’t show up for three months in terms of the set up. In contrast to that, of course, is the fact that leasing is just going crazy now because of projected shortages: I wonder how much of that will be reversed if availability is not [a problem]. So availability versus price and its impact may give us a different path than we would get from a normal cyclical type of analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speakers are expressing their thoughts and opinions, discussing different factors that may affect the CPI and the deflator. There is no indication of disagreement or argument between them.


Passage number 101.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. With the rising price of energy--and I’m thinking now primarily of electric energy--and a presumed move by industry to use it more efficiently, is there a possibility that that will give us a lower industrial production index than we might overwise have had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or question about the possibility of lower industrial production index due to the rising price of energy and increased efficiency in its usage by industries.


Passage number 102.
 MR. KICHLINE. We’ve tried to account for that as best we can. As you well know, a number of years ago we had a fine idea to use for part of the IP index electric power usage as a proxy for output. That was pre-1973. And we’ve felt very nervous about that ever since 1973, quite frankly. Some of the past data that have come in--this was several years ago now--on output measures from the Census Bureau have given us some hints that perhaps we weren’t off that far in the past. We’ve done some informal checking and we’ve made downward adjustments, but it‘s clearly a very hazardous area. We could well be understating output from that side rather than overstating it. M R .  BAUGHMAN. But you’re not continuing to use whatever factors were developed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The first speaker, Mr. Kichline, expresses a concern about using electric power usage as a proxy for output and mentions that some past data hinted at possible inaccuracies. He also mentions that they have made adjustments but still consider it a hazardous area. The second speaker, Mr. Baughman, does not disagree with what Mr. Kichline has said but instead asks a question.


Passage number 103.
 MR. KICHLINE. No, we have made adjustments since about ‘ 1 2 .  I guess, when-- M R .  PARTEE. YOU still use electric power. But you have a trend factor that’s more-- M R .  KICHLINE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The two speakers are discussing adjustments and trend factors related to electric power usage. They are having a normal conversation with no conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 104.
 Yes, it’s about-- MR. ZEISEL. In a sense the productivity factors have been changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the productivity factors have been changed.


Passage number 105.
 MR. PARTEE. And then of course you still have output [data]. You still have manhours, too, and you can look at the manhour s . M R .  KICHLINE. That’s right. And we have physical product data with a lag that accounts ultimately for about half the series.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the different types of data available, such as output data, manhours, and physical product data.


Passage number 106.
 MS. TEETERS. Jim, you had a model that tracked inventories that ran off industrial production data, which you reactivated again. Is that tracking the GNP data still. Do the inventory numbers in the GNP account look to be correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply asking for clarification about whether the model is tracking GNP data accurately.


Passage number 107.
 MR. KICHLINE. They do not look out of line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "They do not look out of line" suggests that the subject being referred to does not appear problematic or objectionable.


Passage number 108.
 MR. COLDWELL. Jim, as I look over your forecast, you have some fairly heavy negatives on gross private domestic investment in the fourth quarter [and] the first quarter of next year. But in terms of the GNP, I assume that your decline in personal consumption 1 1 / 2 0 / 7 9  -13- expenditures made the tail wag the dog here. Is that a good assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell is simply seeking clarification and confirming his understanding of Jim's forecast.


Passage number 109.
 MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think they're both important. On the investment side, the big mover in the short run for some time has been residential construction investment; business fixed investment is important as well. For 1980 as I remember we have a decline in business investment measured from the fourth quarter of about 3 percent. And durable personal consumption expenditures are down around 4-1/2 percent. So we have placed a major emphasis on the behavior of personal consumption expenditures, principally the durables component. I think it's a fair judgment, but I would weight both of them quite high in terms of influencing the [economy's] performance in this forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the importance of both residential construction investment and business fixed investment in the short run. They also emphasize the significance of durable personal consumption expenditures, particularly in relation to the overall economy's performance in the forecast.


Passage number 110.
 MR. COLDWELL. Y o u  have government purchases going up and I don't have the [unintelligible] proportions here to balance off but it looked to me as if you might have an offset here between government purchases and gross private [investment], leaving consumption as the swing package.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 111.
 MR. KICHLINE. In dollar terms, certainly the goods portion of consumption is about twice the size of the investment sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It presents a factual statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 112.
 MR. COLDWELL. What are the possibilities that the consumer is going to confound you still in this fourth quarter and push off the decline until the first quarter of next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question asking about possibilities.


Passage number 113.
 MR. KICHLINE. I would not be willing to risk any of my own money on consumer behavior. I think it's possible. Our view has been that the arguments against that strengthen as each month goes by and as consumers have been using financial assets or debt or reducing savings to finance their purchases. But who knows. It's quite conceivable that [consumer spending] will be strong. M R .  COLDWELL. My recollection is that the consumer surveys have been showing a little more strength lately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Kichline and Mr. Coldwell express their opinions but do not argue or contradict each other.


Passage number 114.
 MR. KICHLINE. That's true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges the statement made by Mr. Kichline as true.


Passage number 115.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You really have to get a pretty big decline in consumption in November and December to make this come out right, don't you. M R .  KICHLINE. NO, I think our forecast is that if we get zero to a 1/4 percent increase in retail sales in November and December, we will hit this number. M R .  PARTEE. If you get what. What was the number. M R .  KICHLINE. A quarter of a percent increase in total retail sales excluding autos. We have a separate auto forecast. That's nominal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 116.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In nominal terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "in nominal terms" is not expressing any disagreement or contention. It is simply introducing a specific way of expressing something.


Passage number 117.
 MR. KICHLINE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 118.
 1 1 / 2 0 / 7 9  -14- MR. COLDWELL. Your October figure is preliminary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that the October figure is preliminary.


Passage number 119.
 MR. KICHLINE. Oh, yes. It's the advance; it's not even the preliminary report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 120.
 MR. COLDWELL. The "flash" or whatever you want to call it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Coldwell.


Passage number 121.
 MR. PARTEE. And it could go the other way, too, couldn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question, which indicates a possibility.


Passage number 122.
 MR. COLDWELL. It could go the other way. M R .  PARTEE. I think we could have a very poor Christmas season, which would start out the new year with an inventory clean-up job and that kind of thing. M R .  SCHULTZ. I don't want to be a Pollyanna, but do you have any sense at all of when we will begin to get some very substantial substitution in the energy area. Clearly, we're getting to the point in energy prices where a lot of secondary and tertiary recoveries get to be very attractive. You point out that the natural gas substitution can go on both in homes and industrial use. Coal, as you say, is very weak. Yet there are a lot of energy plants that can be reconverted to coal. At what point does any of this really start to occur with a vengeance. Do you have any feel for that at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are expressing different opinions and asking questions, but there is no argument or conflict between them.


Passage number 123.
 MR. KICHLINE. No, I don't. We have been getting scattered reports suggesting that some utilities have been switching back. Those that converted under pressure or for price reasons have been switching back and trying to return to the use of natural gas. But there are constraints in these areas. I guess our view is that we don't know enough about the nature of that market to make a reasonable assessment. It's very clear, given price and availability, that the incentives today are there to switch. But we don't have a good feeling for the technical problems involved in this area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Kichline sharing information and expressing uncertainty about the natural gas market.


Passage number 124.
 MR. WILLES. Just two things, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to make a comment very much along the lines of the question asked by Phil Coldwell. The national and international companies headquartered in our region who deal not only in the manufacturing area but in the retail area report exceptionally strong orders and backlogs. They're surprised; they can't believe it. So it may well be that the fourth quarter is buying a little from the first half of next year and this quarter will be a little stronger than we expect. Second, I want to tell the staff how much we appreciate their finally understanding rational expectations because we noticed that in our copy of the supplement to the Current Economic and Financial Conditions the page that is supposed to have capacity utilization on it was blank. And we think they finally understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making two comments about the current state of affairs and expressing appreciation for the staff's understanding of rational expectations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 125.
 MR. PARTEE. You mean rational expectations are an empty box.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing disagreement with the notion that rational expectations are empty or meaningless.


Passage number 126.
 MS. TEETERS. Mark, I think you had the only copy with that particular page blank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. Teeters is stating a fact or observation about the blank page in Mark's copy.


Passage number 127.
 11120179 -15- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Perhaps we can have Mr. Axilrod's statement and then we'll have a coffee break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the plan to have Mr. Axilrod's statement followed by a coffee break.


Passage number 128.
 MR. AXILROD. [statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 129.
] CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you've given us something to chew on other than a donut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is lighthearted and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 130.
 MR. PARTEE. May I ask just one question. Steve, did I understand you to say that you were assuming $2 billion as the initial borrowing on alternative C. M R .  AXILROD. Alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 131.
 MR. PARTEE. And $1-1/2 billion on alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that $1-1/2 billion is spent on alternative B without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The simple answer is "yes" because the phrase "Yes" in response to Mr. Axilrod indicates agreement or affirmation. However, without the context of the rest of the passage, it is difficult to determine the extent or nature of the disagreement or contention.


Passage number 133.
 MR. PARTEE. And what on "A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple quotation from an unnamed speaker.


Passage number 134.
" MR. AXILROD. On "A" it's a little over $1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 135.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage does not provide any information about a discussion or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 136.
 All right, that's an important variable that I think we ought to-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not saying that that couldn't be changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement expressing consideration for a certain variable and the possibility of it being changed.


Passage number 137.
 MR. PARTEE. Yes, of course. That's one of the things I think we ought to vote on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker believes there should be a vote on something.


Passage number 138.
 MR. BLACK. Could I ask one brief question, M r .  Chairman. Steve, you mentioned that under "B" you have a 9-1/2 percent increase in M1 from mid-November to year-end. What is the comparable figure for "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a straightforward question without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 139.
" MR. AXILROD. For "C," it's between 7-112 and 8 percent-- 1-112 to 2 percentage points [less].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to provide specific information about a percentage range for option "C."


Passage number 140.
 MR. SCHULTZ. That's seasonally adjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about something being seasonally adjusted.


Passage number 141.
 MR. AXILROD. Seasonally adjusted--no, just in the sense that I took it from week to week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining that they took something week to week.


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These all also assume we get a weak number in the next published weekly figure, which we don't know. The preliminary figure shows a decline of $2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply presenting a scenario where a weak number in the next published weekly figure is assumed, but it clarifies that the actual figure is currently unknown.


Passage number 143.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 144.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it came out substantially above that, all these growth rates would have to be smaller between now and the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a hypothetical situation and presenting a condition that would need to be met in that scenario.


Passage number 145.
 MS. TEETERS. But that's following a week in which we had a $3 billion [increase].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about a $3 billion increase.


Passage number 146.
 11/20/79 -16- MR. AXILROD. It might be fairer to view it as under " B "  that we have targeted growth in November of 1/2 of one percent and in December a monthly average of 10 percent. Under "C" in November it's about 1/4 of one percent and in December about 8-1/2 percent. I just want to give a sense that we need to push it up, but the week to week [pattern] can vary just depending on how the weeks turn out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different growth targets under different scenarios but does not express any disagreement or contention with those targets.


Passage number 147.
 MR. RICE. Steve, is that 9-1/2 percent growth in M1 over the November and December period what you expect under alternative B or what would be consistent with the 4-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a question asked by Mr. Rice to Steve regarding a specific statistic. There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 148.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's what we in effect targeted to get the 4-1/2 percent [growth rate from September to December].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply stating a fact about the targeted growth rate.


Passage number 149.
 MR. RICE. What's the likelihood that we'll get 9-1/2 percent over the period [to year-end].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question, seeking information about the likelihood of achieving a specific percentage over a specified period of time.


Passage number 150.
 MR. AXILROD. If the Committee puts in the reserves--the reserve path we've designed--we believe we will get it. Where we're uncertain is whether that will be with stable interest rates or declining rates. Our general view is that it will probably be with some decline in interest rates, which is the reason we started that path off with borrowing of $1-1/2 billion--a shade lower than we have had in recent weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their belief and uncertainty about the outcome of a certain situation, but there is no direct conflict or disagreement mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 151.
 MR. RICE. But that is the most likely rate of increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide any context or information about the subject being discussed, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 152.
 MR. AXILROD. It is our collective-type projection of what would happen to money. If interest rates didn't change at all, it would be slightly lower than in alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states a scenario and its possible outcome.


Passage number 153.
 MR. COLDWELL. Yesterday we talked about the possibility of extending our horizon on this. Are you planning to make any comment on that, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell is simply asking Steve if he plans to make a comment on the possibility of extending their horizon.


Passage number 154.
 MR. AXILROD. We did put in the Bluebook--for general guidance--January figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply stated that they included the January figures in the Bluebook for general guidance.


Passage number 155.
 And I could-- MR. PARTEE. You don't show rates for January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that rates for January are not shown. There is no conflicting opinion or argument being presented.


Passage number 156.
 MR. COLDWELL. You don't show rates: that's my point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Coldwell is simply making a point about the lack of displayed rates.


Passage number 157.
 MR. AXILROD. I can tell you what we did there. We assumed you had a 6 percent M1 growth target for the year 1980. So we calculated from the fourth quarter average to the first quarter average a growth of 6 percent. And the figure there for January for alternative B is a level that gets right on that [ 6  percent1 line from the fourth quarter to the first. For alternative A, it's a little over that because [that alternative involves] easing now. And for alternative C it's a little under it. The level that would be implied for alternative B for January gives a January growth rate from December of 5 . 7  percent, just on a month-to-month basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation of how they calculated growth rates for different alternatives.


Passage number 158.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're saying that if we continue that rate--sort of--for February and March, the first quarter would be 6 percent above the fourth quarter. ll/20/79 -11- M R .  AXILROD. It might. I don't know the exact February and March [pattern] but it would be somewhere around there. They could be, depending on how the averages work out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the first statement and states that the increase in the first quarter would be somewhere around 6 percent above the fourth quarter.


Passage number 159.
 MR. COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions "MR. COLDWELL" without providing any information or context that would indicate a contention or disagreement.


Passage number 160.
 Well, comparable to the 4-1/2 percent path that the Committee agreed to for September to December, what would be the rate for-- MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a comparison between different interest rate paths.


Passage number 161.
 I don't have worked out a continuation of the 4-1/2 percent path because-- MR. COLDWELL. Well, I didn't mean necessarily the continuation of 4-1/2 percent, but what would be the path you would recommend for November through January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they haven't developed a continuation plan for the 4-1/2 percent path and Mr. Coldwell clarifies what they meant by asking for a recommended path for November through January.


Passage number 162.
 MR. AXILROD. " B .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no actual passage provided, only a partial sentence. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 163.
 "  CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any further information or context to indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 164.
 "B" is the 4-1/2-- MR. COLDWELL. Through January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only provides information about a certain "B" being referred to as "Mr. Coldwell" until the end of January. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 165.
 MR. PARTEE. It's a lot higher than that, I think M R .  AXILROD. From September to January, the growth rate under "B" is 4.8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both individuals are simply expressing their thoughts or opinions about the growth rate.


Passage number 166.
 MR. COLDWELL. So from November through January you're talking [a bit] higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Coldwell.


Passage number 167.
 MR. AXILROD. F ro m October to January it's 5.5 percent; there's very little difference between that and 5.7 percent for the month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is very little difference between the percentages of 5.5% and 5.7%.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 168.
 MR. PARTEE. How much correction does "C" make on that. What is the growth rate under "C" from December to January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 169.
 MR. AXILROD. In "C," from December to January it's 4.4 percent. We assumed that the Committee would be restraining growth a bit below path in the first quarter, so we have it below and then coming back up. So in January M1 is a little below that 6 percent path. These are all things the Committee can adjust, but that's the assumption we made if you went to alternative C. M R .  PARTEE. So you'd have 4.4 percent for January. Then that means you would have something under 4-1/2 percent for the 4 months. And for the 3 months from October to January growth would be about 4-1/2 percent, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod suggests that M1 growth in January is slightly below the 6 percent path, while Mr. Partee disagrees and suggests it would be under 4-1/2 percent.


Passage number 170.
 MR. AXILROD. It would be 5 percent because the January growth rate picks up a little relative to the other alternatives to begin [to get M11 coming back on the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a statement about the growth rate and there is no opposing view presented.


Passage number 171.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the future, as we said yesterday, I think it would be helpful to spell this out with a little more precision over a longer period of time. This is related to when we next meet and we might just think about that a bit. My inclination at the moment is that we might as well meet again in December and consider [our targets for] next year in a preliminary way--not all of 11/20/79 -18- next year but I'd look at this in a context of at least through the first quarter. And we can't do that very well without some preliminary notions about what that whole year should be. But then in February, we've got to decide about the year. Now we could change the date of the meeting and make it after Christmas and early in January, I suppose. S o ,  think about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply offering their thoughts and suggestions for a future meeting.


Passage number 172.
 MR. AXILROD. Does that mean that at the next meeting, Mr. Chairman, you'd like us to provide paths with alternative longer-run growth rates because the year is starting over and also looking ahead 3 months, say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply seeking clarification from the chairman on what is expected for the next meeting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 173.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By that time I presume we'll have complicated it all by having a new definition of the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there will be a new definition of the money supply in the future, indicating uncertainty and potential disagreement or contention about the subject.


Passage number 174.
 MR. AXILROD. I think the Board is going to make a decision on that shortly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, suggests that the Board will make a decision soon.


Passage number 175.
 MR. PARTEE. Certainly in January we will, [ahead of] when we go up to Congress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement of what will happen in January.


Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So it's going to be a little complicated to say the least. Well, let's have a coffee break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that the situation is going to be complicated and suggests taking a coffee break.


Passage number 177.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would like to go around the table and get some general discussion of the economic situation and at least a preliminary statement of policy. specifics. I remind you that Steve expressed the dilemma very well. One can argue that from the standpoint of domestic business activity it would be nice to get some fairly early declines in interest rates, to the extent we can do that consistent with the general framework of the money supply decisions we made. On the other hand, [that's not the case] from the standpoint of inflationary expectations--which I don't think have changed so much--and from the standpoint particularly of the unrest in Iran adding to the possibilities of turbulence in the oil markets and an oil price decision that we are not going to like. That is the major risk we are running and not just in a narrow sense. It's a major risk the country is running and the world is running. To the extent we can have any marginal influence on that, it points in the other direction [for policy]. So there certainly is a dilemma in the next few weeks. Then we will focus hard on policy Let me say that I think you ought to have in mind this conundrum regarding the [next] Committee meeting. The 18th [of December, our next scheduled meeting date,] is the day after OPEC meets, which is fine if OPEC has made a decision. It's fine in one sense, although it is obviously very early. The chances of OPEC meeting on the 17th and making a decision on the 17th are probably not very high. So it will leave us in a state of suspended animation on that day. Moreover, I don't think we will be in a position then to have absorbed all the distinctions of new and old money supply definitions and all the rest, looking forward to next year. There is the alternative of meeting on Tuesday, the 8th of January. The 8th, 9th or 10th of January [are possibilities]. If we did that, then presumably whatever decision we make here--subject obviously to an interim meeting--is not just for the remainder of November and 11/20/79 -19- December but carries through to the early part of January, by implication, as well. We’ll turn to that again later but I think it may have a little bearing on precisely what we do here. The dates are not ideal; at least the December 18th date isn’t ideal for the two reasons that I suggested. On the other hand it’s not at all impossible; it is scheduled, so we can proceed on that basis, too. Let’s get any general comments you have on the economy and the policy implications you see for it. Would anybody like to offer any comments. Governor Coldwell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different factors and considerations related to the economic situation and policy decisions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 178.
 MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, from my standpoint it seems probable that the economy is going to decline. To me the timing still is a bit [uncertain] as to whether that is going to occur in the fourth quarter or the first. quarter. But I think the chances are high that the fundamentals will bring the economy to a lower rate of growth and probably to negative gEowth. How much of a negative, I‘m not prepared to say at the moment. I think there is a good possibility that we might have a fairly sizable negative in the first and second quarters of next year. The place where I would quarrel a bit with the forecast is in the consumption area. I think there is still some resilience out there in terms of the rate of change in consumption expenditures, possibly even by making use of some [increase in] debt, although there it is difficult to see how that can stretch much further than it is stretched. An overriding problem that I see is that even in the staff forecast we are looking at a 10 percent rate of inflation for at least the next nine months and maybe further than that depending upon some ocher things, including the potential for a very nasty OPEC decision. In terms of the economy, I would mention one other thing. While we did get some curtailment in the rate of bank credit growth, the curtailment was from a 22 percent rate of increase to 18 percent or something like that. we’ve missed our guess on that by a very [large] margin. I believe our forecast on bank credit growth was something like 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent or some range in that neighborhood, so [actual growth] is almost double that. I don‘t find, as I wander around, any real stringency yet. There‘s an awful lot of talk about the price [of credit] bringing things under control [both] in terms of mortgage rates and I think to some considerable extent a usury problem in certain states, but liquidity still seems reasonably adequate for other kinds o f  [expenditures]. S o  my preference would be to tilt [policyl a little on the tight side now, given the prospects for next year, trying to make sure that we don’t have a further expansion [in the aggregates], which might bring us to even higher rates of inflation. I’d like to keep the Committee’s focus on the inflation side for the moment. I do think the chances of [recession] are high next year; and we will have to face the problem of to what extent we allow the rates to go down next year. But I don’t like the possibility of those rates going down now, not only because of the potential [effects on the domestic side1 for this quarter but also because of the international side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell believes that the economy is going to decline and that there is a high chance of negative growth, while also mentioning his disagreement with the forecast in the consumption area. This is in contrast to the staff forecast and potentially the views of other individuals in the conversation who may not share the same perspective.


Passage number 179.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage is incomplete, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 180.
 MR. WILLES. I have to admit that I don’t know what‘s going to happen to the real economy. I’m not sure I even know how to go 11/20/79 -20- about predicting that at the moment because it seems to me that it depends so much on what OPEC does and what the Congress does and lots of other things. I will go on to say, which will be no news to some of you, that in terms of policy it’s not clear to me that it makes any difference what the real sector does over the next twelve months because I’m not sure that we have any demonstrated ability to have an impact on that--in a predictable way anyway. Therefore, for slightly different reasons, I end up exactly where Phil did in terms of focusing on inflation as the primary objective. In terms of how we should do that, I have great concern about the process that we are using. It’s not that I think we made a mistake in going to reserves. I think that‘s a tremendous step forward. But I’m not sure we have done that in such a way that we are likely to have a reasonably good chance of being successful. One of the things that we know is that if we change substantially the way we conduct policy, that is going to change people’s behavior. Therefore, all of the old statistical relationships that we have been able to look at in the past--relationships between interest rates and reserves and monetary aggregates and so on--might well be in the process of changing because we have changed our focus presumably from interest rates to reserves. So all of the discussion that we have about trying to pick a monetary aggregates target and then backing away from that step by step to figure out what the reserves ought to be and the associated interest rates and so on, just strikes me as being backwards. It seems to me that the only reasonable prospect we have of really making it work is to start at the other end and say, okay let‘s fix reserves and then let the system adjust to that. Clearly, we don’t know exactly what impact that is going to have because we don‘t have any functions that are relevant in the new environment. But it doesn’t seem to me that a lot of the things we have been talking about--unless we are lucky--are going to lead us to any kind of predictable result either in terms of the aggregates or in terms of interest rates. So I just feel very uncomfortable with the nature of the discussion that we are having in terms of how we hope to reach a policy decision. I can construct, given the kinds of conversations we have had so far, a relatively simple model that would say that what we would end up with are reserves that are totally demand determined. And it seems to me that we are trying to do just the opposite of that. We are trying to make reserves and, therefore, the aggregates supply determined. Yet the mechanisms we have set up would have just the opposite result. some things we have said this morning, I hope either today or in the near future we can discuss in detail the experiment that we are trying. I say that because it‘s not clear to me, regardless of what the ultimate objectives we set are, that we stand a very good chance of getting exactly where we want to go unless we just turn out to be lucky.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the current policy approach and uncertainty about its effectiveness in achieving the desired outcome. They also criticize the process of setting monetary aggregates targets and suggest an alternative approach.


Passage number 181.
 S o ,  going back to yesterday’s discussion as well as CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman. M R .  BAUGHMAN. M r .  Chairman, I would say with respect to a general economic forecast that I would subscribe to what Mark Willes has said as to the probable low value [any forecast] would have in the present circumstances. It seems to me that the staff projection is a reasonable one. I would not be surprised if [the economy] actually 11/20/79 -21- goes down more in the early part of next year than the staff has projected, particularly in the measure of industrial production, for example. But I'm not sure [that prospect1 should weigh heavily in our policy posture today. With respect to our region, of course, we have benefited in terms of local activity from the oil and gas business; the level of that activity is high and is continuing to rise. that, of course, domestic production of oil is declining and I'm advised that the rate of decline will probably accelerate next year because the Alaskan line will have reached capacity. AS it has been moving to capacity, it has given us an increase or has offset reductions elsewhere this year. So the outlook for continued growth of domestic sources apparently is somewhat bleak. With respect to softening in economic activity locally, insofar as there is any softening it seems to be traceable to usury interest rate ceilings. AS nearly as we can tell from fragmentary information, the banks are doing a pretty good job of looking across the array of customers, as you suggested they should do, Mr. Chairman, in adjusting to the current situation and they are trying to avoid just lopping off large sectors of borrowers. Notwithstanding Moving from the economic picture to the policy picture, I'm [about] right on track with what Phil Coldwell has suggested. I read [the materials for this meeting] rather carefully, I thought, and I listened rather intently to Mr. Axilrod's comments. Accepting the proposition that we probably should continue the present policy for the time being, it seemed to me that alternative C came a little closer to that than the alternative B prescription. Obviously, there's not a big difference but on balance it seemed to me to come out that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker sharing their thoughts and agreeing with the opinions of others.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M r .  Timlen. M R .  TIMLEX. I must say that in my judgment the consumer has been a great source of strength for a long time and I think finally that is going to turn around. I'm particularly impressed by the fact that the impact of [the cost of] heating homes in the Northeast is going to present quite a challenge to some personal budgets and may affect spending plans. I've talked to a number of savings bankers and country bankers in New York and New Jersey over the past few weeks. And despite the Chairman's urgings, outside of New York City at any rate there is no mortgage money in a savings bank or small commercial bank. The banks in New Jersey and outside of New York City are even changing their terms on consumer loans and are not taking on new business. In the state of New York currently the thrifts are very concerned about their loss of funds outright to other investment outlets. And where they are not losing the money to other investment outlets, they are gravely concerned about shifting money from inexpensive savings accounts into various certificates. Generally that clouds my picture as to the strength of the consumer in the first quarter of next year. I must say that for the first time we are hearing concerns in New York as to the possible implications for our banking system of either short-term or long-term withdrawals of OPEC monies from United States banks. I haven't heard that too often, but it is a matter of some discussion. I would say that from my standpoint the focus should 1 1 1 2 0 / 7 9  -22- continue to be on inflation until we get a better reading of the fourth quarter. And I do share the concerns about the position of the dollar in foreign exchange markets. Therefore, I would stand behind some variation of "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts, observations, and concerns without stating or discussing opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 183.
 MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I think I can endorse a great deal of what has been said. I would like to make it very clear that I don't think we have any more control of the aggregates than when we were operating on an interest rate target. Yet the media and I think some of my colleagues here think that we have run out and put our hands directly on the aggregates; I don't think that's true. I agree with Mark that the fact that we've changed [our approach] is going to change the relationships. of difficulty and there is going to come a time when we are going to fail. We were lucky last month that it turned out the way it did. So, keep in mind as we are making policy that we aren't out there directly determining the Ms. And I'm a little concerned that when we begin to want to expand the money supply we will provide the reserves and there won't be any response in the money supply down the line. I believe we are going to have a great deal I am also very concerned about the consumer. There is no housing money; [financial intermediaries] are loaned up. I think our policy should basically be steady as you go at the present time. I would not want to force the banks to borrow any more than $1-1/2 billion under alternative B because I do think the economy is going to turn down. And when it does, I think it's going to drop very suddenly. When people get the first monthly bill for heating oil it is going to hit us. I think there is going to be a gasoline shortage again and I feel that people quite possibly are going to be very conservative at Christmas. I would come out in support of alternative B with $1-112 billion of borrowings and I would increase the federal funds rate. In other words, I favor a "B-minus" policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters expresses disagreement with the belief that the Federal Reserve has direct control over the aggregates (money supply) and argues that their approach has changed and may result in failure. Additionally, she expresses concern about the consumer, the housing market, and the potential for an economic downturn. She also disagrees with forcing banks to borrow more and supports an alternative policy (B) with a lower borrowing amount.


Passage number 184.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Increase the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Increase the federal funds rate." This sentence simply suggests raising the federal funds rate, without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 185.
 MS. TEETERS. I want to increase the range. I might combine alternative B and $1-112 billion of borrowings with a federal funds range of 10-1/2 to 15-112 percent so that when the signs begin to come through very strongly that the economy is weakening the interest rates can drop naturally somewhat more than they could before. In other words, I would like to "unskew" it a bit without raising the top but by dropping the bottom to allow more fluctuations in the rate. And when the rate does start to go down, it will have the space to do that in a natural way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is expressing her desire to increase the range of interest rates in order to allow for more fluctuations in the rate. There is no opposing argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 186.
 MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff forecast is a good one and I certainly am prepared to go along with it. It seems pretty clear that the economy is headed for a contraction in the early part of 1980. We see evidence of this already but it's obvious that the increase in energy prices, the prevailing tightness in financial markets, and a continuing [high] rate of inflation will combine to make the contraction in 1980 steeper or deeper than was earlier forecast. So the outlook is clearly for considerable economic weakness in the year ahead. In the face of that, it seems that our choice is between alternatives A and B; we should be focused more on the effect of such a decision in the year ahead. It was pointed out clearly in the 11/20/79 -23- Bluebook that between now and the end of the year it doesn't really make much difference which alternative we choose. The main impact of a choice between alternatives A and B will in all probability be on the financial conditions that prevail in the early part of 1980. I agree with a good deal of what has been said. I, too, place a great deal of emphasis on the need to continue to resist inflation. However, I feel also that at a time when we expect economic weakness to occur we ought not to put the economy in a situation where monetary policy is exacerbating rather than [helping]. We at least ought not to be operating to worsen the real developments in the economy. S o  I would much prefer to follow a course that would stand a better chance of providing adequate liquidity in a weak economy--not excessive liquidity, of course, but adequate liquidity at a time when it is needed--rather than being in a posture of having to provide reserves at a time when, as Nancy put it, they will not do very much good. While preferring to lean in this direction, I would also prefer later on by some months to move more quickly to reverse policy sooner in the cycle and to tighten monetary policy when it's clear that the economy is strengthening rather than risk overtightness in a situation that is clearly weakening. So for those reasons I would lean toward alternative B and I would also be prepared to stay with a federal funds range of 11-1/2 to 15 percent. I think one can no longer be greatly impressed with the argument that real interest rates are negative. They are now positive and the unfolding situation that would be consistent with alternative B would also be one that would lean against inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the staff forecast and discussing their preferred course of action based on the economic outlook.


Passage number 187.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just pick up on one comment you made. You talked about changing policy and I guess I'd ask you what you mean by "changing policy." The question comes up all the time. What did you mean when you said that--measuring it in terms of the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows a request for clarification or further explanation but not disagreement or contention.


Passage number 188.
 MR. RICE. Right, right. In relation to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker's response simply acknowledges and agrees with whatever was mentioned before.


Passage number 189.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This question is going to plague us, I tell you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that the question will continue to bother or trouble them.


Passage number 190.
 MR. RICE. Now, let me just finish. What I had in mind was late in 1980 or perhaps even early in t19811, whenever the economy begins to strengthen, I would be prepared to tighten monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Rice is proposing a plan to tighten monetary policy at a specific time in the future when the economy strengthens. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In terms of the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Not enough information is provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 192.
 MR. RICE. In terms of the money supply and at a much earlier point than the Federal Reserve normally does. In this way we'd continue to resist inflation rather than err on the side of maintaining the situation where liquidity would be inadequate [for a1 time .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a different approach to the Federal Reserve's handling of the money supply in order to resist inflation. There is no indication of disagreement or conflict with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The reason I [raise] the point is that I think it has some relevance unfortunately for this meeting and for every meeting, I suppose. When I appear in public or in private in the first question I get is, "Are you going to stick with it." So I say what "sticking with it" means. I go through my song and dance about how, particularly with this present technique, we measure it by the money supply and that's not inconsistent at all with a decline in 11/20/79 -24- interest rates when the economy declines, particularly if the inflation rate is declining. I have done this a dozen times in public and dozens of times in private. I was at a lunch yesterday where there were some presumably sophisticated people who have heard me say this in public dozens of times, or at least a half dozen times, as well as some unsophisticated types. And an unsophisticated guy asked me "Are you going to stick with it." I went through my song and dance [about howl we are going to stick with it in terms of the money supply but that doesn't mean interest rates can't come down. I no sooner got finished with this 10 to 15 minute discussion when one of the presumed sophisticates--a member of the Washington economic press--says, "Now, what I want to know is when are you going to change policy." I said, "What do you mean by changing policy." He says, "The first time interest rates go down." There we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply recounting their experience of being asked questions about sticking with a certain policy and explains their response to those questions.


Passage number 194.
 MS. TEETERS. That's why I think we should let them fluctuate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Ms. Teeters expressing her opinion about letting something fluctuate.


Passage number 195.
 MR. MAYO. That would be favorable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 196.
 MS. TEETERS. We're going to have to break that psychology.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 197.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris. M R .  MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, we are still more pessimistic than the staff on the projection for 1980, but they are getting a lot closer to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 198.
 We are still looking for a recession, something on the scale of 1974-75, as the result of the three shocks that we have going: the energy shock; what I think now can be called the interest rate shock, which is showing up in Boston in the fact that [a borrower] can get mortgage money from the Boston savings banks-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It appears to be a statement or observation about the author's ongoing search for a recession and the factors contributing to it.


Passage number 199.
 MR. MORRIS. Yes. The savings banks are offering it. Money is available, but the demand is falling off very sharply because of the rate--the fact that they are asking 13 percent plus 2 points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting a statement of fact regarding the availability of money and the declining demand due to the high rate. There is no disagreement or contention expressed in this passage.


Passage number 200.
 MR. TIMLEN. Frank, what's the usury ceiling in Massachusetts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for information.


Passage number 201.
 MR. MORRIS. We don't have a usury ceiling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Morris is stating a fact, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 202.
 MR. TIMLEN. You see, we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Timlen simply begins a sentence without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 203.
 MR. PARTEE. You have a particular problem, [Tom].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 204.
 MR. MORRIS. I think we are seeing for the first time real price rationing in mortgage markets. In the past, most of the impact has been on availability but I think we are in a situation now where we could well see a liquidity buildup in the thrifts because the demand is not there at those rates of interest. The other shock I have in mind is the proposition 13 shock because I have been making a lot of comparisons to the '74-'75 period. One area of the economy that was a great sustaining force in '74 and '75 that clearly is not going to be that way in 1980 is the state and local government sector. 11/20/79 -25- Having said that, it seems to me that the reserve path under alternative C looks quite all right and I would start out with the initial assumption of $1-1/2 billion in borrowing. And I think I'm much more optimistic than either Nancy or Mark about what this procedure is going to yield for us. The figures that Steve showed us yesterday made it very clear, I think, that over very short periods of time the reserves/deposits relationship is very unstable. But as we add [timel--as we go from 2 months to 3 months to 4 months--1 think we will see, if we can stick with our guns, that relationship stabilize. I have urged Steve to give us some cumulative totals as we go along and I think they will bear out this relationship. M R .  RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is the opinion of Mr. Morris.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 205.
 Question: You are associating $2 billion of borrowing with alternative C as-- MR. MORRIS. I said initially $1-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, originally stated that the borrowing would be $1-1/2 billion, but the other person is associating it with alternative C as $2 billion. This discrepancy indicates a disagreement or contention between the two individuals.


Passage number 206.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a modified "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be an incomplete statement.


Passage number 207.
" MR. RICE. That's what I was getting at. You are modifying alternative C by reducing the borrowing level associated with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification or further information regarding the modification of alternative C.


Passage number 208.
 MR. MORRIS. But I'd certainly move to $2 billion if the money figures come through strong enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. Mr. Morris is expressing his willingness to increase the budget to $2 billion if the financial aspect supports it.


Passage number 209.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting points of view or opposing arguments.


Passage number 210.
 Guffey MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, we believe the staff's forecast to be a good one, particularly with the caveats about additional oil price increases that may come out of the December OPEC meeting and that would turn the first quarter a bit lower perhaps than our initial forecast would suggest. As to business activity in our area, particularly in regard to housing and autos, autos virtually have stopped selling simply because of credit and prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the staff's forecast and provides additional information about potential oil price increases and their impact on the first quarter. They also mention a separate issue of low sales in the housing and autos sector due to credit and prices.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 211.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are different kinds o f  [auto] credit, [do you mean] consumer credit or dealer credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests a disagreement or contention by questioning the intended meaning of "auto credit" and proposing alternative options of "consumer credit" or "dealer credit."


Passage number 212.
 MR. GUFFEY. Both. With respect to housing, we have two situations within the seven states. One is the usury ceiling, which of course has cut off all residential housing. But the same is true in the other areas where usury laws are not a [factor]. The savings and loans virtually have shut their doors. They are not prepared to bid for the high priced short-term money and put it out other than is necessary to meet the commitments they had outstanding before these recent rate increases. Beyond that, retail sales have turned soft and as a result there is fairly good evidence that [they] are going to move to a lower level. What Christmas may hold I suppose nobody knows, but quite likely it will be a bit softer than we would have thought some time earlier in the year. With regard to the policy we may be considering today, I would say first of all that I, too, would opt for "C" or something even a bit to the right of "C"--and for a couple of reasons that are a bit different than those Governor Coldwell has already expressed. One, it seems to me that if we try to move growth in the aggregates up in the next six weeks to 9-1/2 percent, as Steve has suggested--or if we get zero in November it's 11 percent [in December]--we are going to 11/20/79 -26- get a funds rate drop. And [the rate1 would be pushing on the lower end of the 11-1/2 percent range that we now have or of some lower range if we were to set it lower today. I think that would be totally inappropriate, not only domestically but also internationally. In the discussions that I had on a trip to Europe recently I got very much the same question that you said was proposed to you. If they see our interest rates drop before they see some [progress] in the fight against inflation, then they are going to believe that we have lost our resolve and, therefore, act accordingly. And the dollar will quite likely come under some pressure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 213.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand your international reason, but after your recital on the domestic economy why do you argue that [case] domestically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply questioning the argument made in relation to the domestic economy.


Passage number 214.
 MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 215.
 Well, it seems to me that we are going to have the same kind of psychology-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a psychology [issue].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion or observation about a psychology issue, but there is no contradictory or conflicting information presented.


Passage number 216.
 MR. GUFFEY. Yes. Policy-wise, it seems to me that it would be appropriate to adopt " C "  or perhaps something a bit more restrictive than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states their opinion that "C" or something more restrictive would be appropriate, but there is no opposing view or argument presented.


Passage number 217.
 On the other hand-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You still get a passing grade with "D." M R .  GUFFEY. With regard to modifying "C," however, I'd maintain the federal funds range that we now have--that's 11-l/2 to 15-1/2 percent. It seems to me that it would be inappropriate to change that range. If my understanding is correct, the first time the markets or the world will see that 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent range will be when we publish our policy record after this meeting. It seems to me that it's important for stability purposes to maintain that range. S o  what I would propose is that we adopt "C" with an 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent funds rate range rather than the one listed for "C." Lastly, I would hope that we would not take action, as "B" would suggest, to try to validate the 4-1/2 percent growth rate that we set in early October for the fourth quarter, simply to try to make that come true if implicit in that is a drop in interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and proposing a specific action, but there is no indication of any opposing views or disagreement among the participants.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. ROOS. m. ROOS. M r .  Chairman, I think it's important at this stage of our deliberations [to stand] back and again ask ourselves whether we really are aware of what we have announced publicly that we are going to do. On October 6 we announced that we are going to change our procedures to concentrate more on the control of money growth. Our experience in the Eighth District is that that announcement was received with almost universal approval. And the question that my associates and I get is the same one you do: Is the Fed really prepared to stick with it. One of the things that disturbs me today as I hear the comments is whether we really have a common understanding of what "it" is. My understanding is that "it" does not entail trying on a monthly basis to adjust what we're doing in reaction to what are really short-term economic problems. I don't even think that "it" means doing something the week after OPEC makes a decision--to meet that immediate need. For this process to be 11/20/79 -27- successful, we've got to recognize that we cannot operate on a day-to- day or "micro" basis. We have to set longer-term targets; we have to announce those targets; and we have to avoid the temptation to be nervous Nellies if one week something happens that might frighten us. I don't mean that we blindfold ourselves and blindly stick with [our targets] but I think we have to set longer-term targets and be prepared to do what is necessary to achieve those longer-term targets. One thing that I think would be devastating in this regard is to feel somehow that we will follow this [new procedure] but also worry about whether we ought to reduce the upper limit of the fed funds rate from 15-1/2 to 14-l/2 percent. That sounds as though we have taken a half step but we are not sure where we are going. Specifically, I would recommend that we choose alternative B, because alternative B--if I understand the staff projections [and analysis]--coincides with what we agreed last month to do. And if for no other reason than the therapeutic value of sticking, in our first month's reactions, with what we decided to do last month, I'd like to see us adopt alternative B and [stay with our plan1 to seek M1 growth of 4-1/2 percent by the end of the year. Then I'd like us to project into 1980 a specific long-term target that will be consistent with that. I believe--and if I'm wrong, we're all wrong--that our primary responsibility is not to waffle and to ask ourselves if the aggregates can be controlled. Y o u  said, and we ratified this publicly, that yes, we believe the aggregates can be controlled. That was why we did what we did on October 6. In my view our job now is to get the best minds within this System, which I think includes some of our Reserve Bank economists as well as [Board] staff, to work out these processes we talked about yesterday so that we can demonstrate that the aggregates can be controlled. If we fall--if we retreat from what we announced on October 6--I think [it will be] the last straw and any credibility regarding the Federal Reserve's monetary policymaking will be lost. I really think we're on a path of no retreat. I apologize for the length of that statement, but let's understand what we've bitten off; whether it's right or wrong, we've taken that step and the fat is in the fire. Now let's find out the best way to make it work. I think that's our mission.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his concerns and urging his colleagues to stick to the plan that was previously agreed upon. He is emphasizing the importance of setting longer-term targets and avoiding reactionary decisions based on short-term economic problems. There is no disagreement or debate presented.


Passage number 219.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Wallich without providing any information about his actions or opinions, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
 MR. WALLICH. I have no quarrel with the staff's forecast, though I think there is at least a possibility that the OPEC decision will be less adverse than they think. In Europe there seems to be a feeling that oil is reasonably plentiful and, therefore, that the ability to raise [its price] rather drastically is less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Wallich, expresses a difference of opinion with the staff's forecast regarding the potential adverse impact of OPEC's decision. He believes that there is a possibility that the impact will be less severe than anticipated, based on a perception in Europe that oil is plentiful. This reflects a disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They only buy it at $40 a barrel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about the price at which "they" buy something, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 222.
 MR. WALLICH. Well, but at least they've got it. Even so, I think it's clear that we're facing a worsening outlook for both unemployment and inflation. The [situation] seems to be worse on the side of inflation than unemployment and slow growth. So I think we've got to weight our approach accordingly--that is, lean more in the direction of fighting inflation than taking account of the recession. 1 1 / 2 0 / 7 9  -28- We have [adopted] a money supply policy for some time into the future and we're really talking here about how to phase into that longer-run path. Admittedly, we're going to review the path in December or maybe in January. But basically we laid down a pattern for the future and this ought to satisfy those who like Larry feel that we ought to have a fairly firm target. I'm quite skeptical of the meaning of this target; I don't think M1 measures what it is supposed to be measuring. If we had the revised aggregates--and revised them the way I would like to see them revised--that [new] M1 would be advancing faster. We see bank credit advancing fast, and it has grown at a very stable rate all through the year, fluctuating in an 11 to 14 percent range. And in the forecast it is not projected to slow down; it's currently projected to increase at its [recent] rate of growth month by month through January. All that suggests to me that we do need continued restraint. I don't see the prospect of another blow being dealt to us by OPEC as a reason for relaxing; it would seem to me a reason for doing more. Otherwise we'll be in the position of the man who was told by his doctor to take it easy because he is badly overworked. And at that moment he has a heart attack so he says, "Well if things are as bad as that, I might as well go back to working a full schedule." It would seem to me that if we are hit harder on the inflation front, then the severity of another blow is a reason for increasing the effort, not for diminishing the effort. I'd like to say a word about the dollar. I think in the long run we have to adjust to the prospect that we certainly can't keep up with the D-mark. If this inflation is going to go on and on, the differential between the D-mark and the dollar is perpetuated. We are in much the same position as the French are with the franc; they cannot get their inflation down and they're trying desperately to hang on. They've had to take one downward step; they'll have to take others. I don't think we have to yield on our trade-weighted exchange rate, which is the more meaningful measure of the dollar. We ought to be able to hold on and our policies ought to be designed to that end. Now, I quite share the reactions of the Chairman and of Roger Guffey [regarding] people's statements about our policies. AS soon as we say interest rates are coming down as a result of a logical evolution of our money supply policy, they say: '"Aha, you're changing your policy." I think there's an obvious logical defect here. One can perhaps differentiate two statements. One is: We're not changing our policy, but the environment is deteriorating as far as maintenance of the value of the dollar is concerned and maybe that's the logical consequence. But we do have to make clear that our policy is the money supply, properly defined, and that interest rates therefore do have greater flexibility. And if inflation comes down, I think that will be fairly acceptable. The problem is that inflation may not come down. Well, forgive me for that long statement. I just want to say briefly that I lean toward alternative C. The only thing, frankly, that bothers me about it is the prospect that it will bring interest rates down sometime this winter. But I'm aware that we presumably will have a chance to reassess that. If inflation comes down and we have a serious economic situation, the doors are entirely open. But I don't want to prejudice that [policy response] now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich expresses his opinion and concerns, but there is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you say--"C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 224.
" 11/20/79 -29- MR. WALLICH. "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or excerpt from someone named Mr. Wallich without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments mentioned.


Passage number 225.
" CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles. M R .  BALLES. I don't see any basic reason for changing the posture that we adopted on October 6 ,  Mr. Chairman. With respect to the real economy, the obvious [areas of] weakness that we observe are housing and autos, although I must say that on the West Coast the sag in housing has been offset by what some builders describe as a furious pace of activity in the non-residential construction field. One encouraging sign in the housing situation in our area is that the state's largest commercial bank and its largest savings and loan association recently knocked off a little on their mortgage rates-- coming down a half point, though admittedly from very high levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion and observations without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 226.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From [14-1/21 to 14 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. It simply states a numerical range, indicating a decrease from 14-1/21 to 14 percent.


Passage number 227.
 MR. BALLES. No, from 13-1/2 to 13 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response is a direct answer to a question without any conflicting statements.


Passage number 228.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now that is an encouraging sign.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Now that is an encouraging sign" expresses a positive sentiment and does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 229.
 MR. BALLES. But it is encouraging. M R .  PARTEE. I did not know that a savings and loan did that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two individuals discussing a topic.


Passage number 230.
 MR. BALLES. Home Savings as well as Bank of America. The expectation with respect to the general economy as contained in the Board staff forecast is quite similar to our staff forecast, which I would generally describe as a modest recession by past standards. Obviously, there's a great deal of uncertainty surrounding all these forecasts today. But that's still, I think, the most reasonable expectation. And of course inflation still continues to be the greatest danger here, as many of us view it. I think one of the real problems we are dealing with is the lags that are built into the impact of monetary policy, which we've known about all along. Unfortunately they are not predictable. Those lags are variable but it is typical in a period of restraint that the bad news comes [first] and the good news comes later, in the sense of an observable diminution of inflationary pressures. The only bad result I see from our October 6 actions is the very sharp rise in long-term interest rates. Maybe the school of rational expectations has an answer to [why that has occurred], Mark, because I can't get an answer from anybody else, including my own staff. To the extent that those rates are influenced by expectations of inflation I'm still wondering why--I'm totally nonplussed--they went up instead of coming down. I think that underscores the point that many people around the table have already made, which is that psychology is so darn important right now. articulated, the real purpose of our October 6 actions was to get inflation under control by bringing about a deceleration of money [growth]. And we're being observed very, very closely on what's going on there. When there becomes a greater public awareness of what happened in October--that there was a considerable deceleration in the rate of [money] growth--and if the November figures come in as Steve has projected them, that will add still further credibility. As you so well 11/20/79 -30- So I think we're right in the midst of a great credibility test right now and I wouldn't want to rock the boat by any major change in the posture that we adopted with respect to the targets for money growth by the end of the year. [I say that] because I think our credibility and hence our impact on long-term interest rates and inflationary expectations in general will be messed up if we don't meet those goals that we've announced. Good or bad we have announced them. They are out there and we're going to be judged by them. When it comes down to the fine strokes between alternative B and alternative C, I think there's not an awful lot to choose; we may be involved in unnecessary or unproductive fine-tuning here. But if I had to choose between them I guess I would lean a little toward " C .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker's observations and opinions about the economy, inflation, interest rates, and the credibility of their actions. There are no conflicting viewpoints presented in the passage.


Passage number 231.
 "  CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 232.
 MR. MAYO. I'd say a couple of things. I have no fault with the staff forecast except that my elbow--which doesn't quite have the problem o€ Nancy's elbow but maybe it will get that way--tells me that the economy will be weaker than in the forecast. The chances are greater that it will be weaker with greater unemployment and unfortunately maybe even a little more inflation. I still feel very strongly that the Fed's job is to concentrate more on the inflation in our economy now than on the real sector, again partly because we are the only game in town. Even though our effectiveness may be limited, psychologically it is far more effective than anybody else's. My answer to John Balles on the reason why long-term interest rates have gone up is that there has been, even among sophisticates, an almost complete turnover and disillusionment as to whether inflation can be controlled. This is reflected in long-term rates and it makes our job even more of a challenge. I welcome what we did yesterday, Mr. Chairman, as well as Steve's additional input this morning. But I think we may be engaging in a bit of self-flagellation here that is over and above the call of duty. We made a giant step on October 6. AS we sit back and look at it, it isn't that giant a step in terms of what I would call an evolution of monetary policy and its strategies and techniques. We have been concerned with reserves before; we just were too timid to let the system work. We have freed the reserve control concept now of its interest rate bounds to a considerable extent. And yet we must grant that we have found no magic formula as to additional ways of making this process of monetary policy as simple as some of our academic friends believe it can be made. We still have lags; we still have multiplier effects that differ; and we still have disputes as to how to do our seasonal adjustments. We can go right down the line, and we still have basically the same problems we had before. This has been a very important step, but I would rather view it more as an evolutionary step than a revolutionary step. The press has taken it up as a revolutionary step and we can live in the glory of that in the short run. I don't think that it is understood yet what we are doing apropos of the Chairman's statement about [being asked] when is policy going to change. I welcome Larry's speech on defining "it" as having a longer-term span than many people had argued before; I certainly agree that that is true. And it's for that reason that I don't share Roger's worry that a big December number is going to get us into any trouble. I prefer "B;" I would not object to the Morris formulation 11/20/79 -31- of "C" with the $1-1/2 billion [on initial borrowing]. I do not see anything particularly wrong with that. I would take us at our word, though, on the releasing of the federal funds constraint and go with 11 to 16 percent. I would broaden it by 1/2 percentage point on [each] side to indicate again our willingness to see the rate fluctuate a little more. I see nothing wrong with that. But I come back to the point that I think is terribly important: Although I welcome the soul searching [and the attention] we are giving to the change in technique and the way the Board staff and the Desk have approached it, we are still dealing basically with the same animal that we did before. We have a chance here to sharpen things up--and we have sharpened things up--but certainly there is no way to make this process as simple as perhaps some of us would like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal opinions and observations, but there is no disagreement with anyone else mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 233.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions the name "Mr. Black" without any further information or context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 234.
 MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think it's pretty obvious that the Iranian crisis has potentially great implications for the domestic outlook--[morel than the mere availability of petroleum supplies. But absent that problem, I would think the staff's forecast would be about right. If I had to guess which way the error might be, I would think the economy might be somewhat weaker than they are projecting. It's certainly true that the economy has shown amazing resilience up until now. I guess inventories are in better shape than they were this time in the 1973-74 downturn. But when I look at the weakness in housing and hear a talk like Frank Morris gave us on the resistance to rates and about the lack of availability of funds, I think housing is going to be quite weak. I think the consumer is pretty well over-extended. I gathered an interesting observation from the chief executive officer of He said that consumer loan demand had virtually dried up at is their consumer financing company, but was still present at the bank. I asked him if this related to the type of customer the two institutions have. He allowed as how he didn't know but said that might be part of it. And finally, I would think that if we made an error on the [forecast] of net exports, they would probably be weaker than we had guessed because of the increasing restrictiveness of monetary policy abroad and the generally unsettled international climate. Turning to the policy side, I think the most important task is for us to hit our long-run targets. I agree, as someone said earlier, that we can probably do that pretty well with any of these alternatives. Certainly we ought to hit the M1 and M3 targets with any of them and I believe we'd come pretty close on M2 with any of them. Bank credit I guess we are going to miss altogether. So I don't think that there's a lot to choose from in view of the short period left, as Emmett Rice mentioned. I have a marginal preference for "B." My only concern with "B" is that the lower limit on the federal funds rate range might be a little high at 11-1/2 percent. Now, last time I argued that we ought not to put that below 11-1/2 percent because I thought we had a credibility problem. And I felt that if [the funds rate] came down before we demonstrated any control over the aggregates, we'd have a real problem. But I do think we have gained considerable credibility at this point and also the economy looks weaker. So against that background, although I'm somewhat 11/20/79 -32- concerned over what Henry and Scott said earlier about the foreign reaction, I think the reserve growth needed to achieve alternative B may well entail more federal funds rate movement on the down side than some might expect. I think the rate might have to go below current rates by a fairly significant level so I would want to lower that lower limit to 10-1/2 percent. I guess I’d stay with 15-1/2 percent for the high end, but I surely wouldn’t object to raising that. I might be wrong on this and I would suggest that maybe we ought to have a telephone conference if the funds rate approaches either of those limits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement or contention in the passage. They express concerns about the economy being weaker than projected, weakness in housing, the consumer being over-extended, and the potential need to adjust the lower limit on the federal funds rate. They also mention concerns about foreign reaction to their decision.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Partee and does not provide any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 236.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, we are plotting a path [for the provision of reserves], and there never will seem to be much difference in the short run in the paths that we plot because they only work out over the long run. But I think there is a difference between alternatives A, B, and C. There’s a different implication for the shape of monetary growth in the first quarter that transcends the very precise [short-run] period we are talking about. In a coming recession, whatever its shape or size--and it may be quite different than we are expecting right now--1 think it is important that we continue to say that it is our job and our intention to provide for a reasonable amount of money and credit growth. That’s really about all we can do. [And we need to do so] as safely [as possible] with inflation on the one side and unemployment, which I would point out to you is projected by the staff to be as high as 8.4 percent for next year, on the other side. About all we can do is to have that kind of ambition. I would, of course, as we have sacrificed the mortgage market, sacrifice the foreign exchange market at the right point in the battle to maintain moderate growth of money and credit over the period to come. Now literally it seems to me that we would stay with alternative B here because we have had some shortfalls in monetary growth rates in October and some are projected--perhaps [they will occur], perhaps not--for November. Remember, all we are doing is talking about the path of our provision [of reserves], not what will actually develop in monetary growth. But I dislike that a little because it seems to me that it implies providing too many reserves in December. I think we have to have a strategy for making up shortfalls and overshoots, and we haven’t really quite developed one yet. Although we have had a shortfall, I don’t like the idea of running too strongly in December for fear that it will extend over into the early part of next year. So my view is that we ought to try to make up a little, but not the full amount, of the shortfall. I think that puts me between alternative B and alternative C. The path I would propose for the Desk and Steve to work on is 5 percent for the 2-month period in M1 and 8-1/2 percent in M2; and I don’t think M3 has any great significance in path setting in that time frame. To be fair, it also requires the setting of an initial borrowing level and my view of the matter is that we should stay with $1-112 billion. I was thinking that perhaps it ought to be a little higher, but then I was reminded that the reason the borrowing is [currently] above $1-1/2 billion is that we’ve had a few misses so to be absolutely even-handed we perhaps should have the $1-1/2 billion initial assumption. On the funds rate range, I certainly wouldn’t want to narrow it. I agree with Larry Roos. We have announced to the world that 11/20/79 -33- we’ve changed the way we do things. And to appear to be constraining [the funds rate1 again or to seem to be moving toward a constraint is unnecessary and hardly makes worthwhile the anguish that the market has gone through in adjusting to our announcement of the change in policy. Now, if we open it up a little, I really don’t care. I think for this particular period I would leave the range at 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent; we‘re just about in the middle of that right now and I believe there probably won’t be any need to raise it on the top end in the period to come. We can open it up later by reducing the lower end if in fact the performance of the monetary aggregates comes in below our expectations. I guess that’s it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own view and making suggestions, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 237.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn. M R .  WINN. To start I’d like to commend Steve and Peter again for their performance yesterday. I hope that we can have the second verse of modulations on the theme, whether we meet in December or January, with the same group. I thought it was an extremely productive meeting. As I indicated earlier, I am still concerned about the shock impact versus the economic impact. First, in the mortgage market I think there will probably be more funds available; people are being sold on the idea of paying the present prices because these mortgages can be refinanced. Unlike our long-term Treasuries, which have call protection, the possibility of paying a high price temporarily or at least the prospect of [the house] being sold may lead to somewhat more mortgage money being advanced than we contemplate at the moment. If I were to guess on the outlook for next year--and we have not talked about fiscal policy and what that may mean--I’d say the prospect of our forecast, as good as it may be, [materializing] is not a very high one. I don‘t know whether changes will occur early in the year or late in the year but I suspect we will see big deviations as economic conditions unfold. Second, I agree with Bob Black that the Iranian situation, the Cambodian situation, and others portend shocks that are outside the energy area but could be quite significant as we look down the road. So I’m really uncertain as to what the outlook may be. Another shock we face is the fact that we are going to change the [definitions of the] aggregates and that‘s going to introduce another uncertainty into the picture. In view of that, I would be inclined to go with alternative C on the aggregates measures because of the phase-in or transitional stage. I’d stay with the present federal funds range, as in alternative B, and keep the $1-1/2 billion in borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement between the speakers. Mr. Winn is simply expressing his thoughts and uncertainties about various economic factors.


Passage number 238.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage you provided is incomplete. Please provide the complete passage so I can properly analyze it.


Passage number 239.
 MR. EASTBURN. Chuck Partee has given the precise description that I was prepared to propose, though the route by which we arrived at that might be a little different. I start with the comment that you made, Mr. Chairman, about your sophisticated and unsophisticated audiences, which I think is very much to the point. We have many non-economic factors that are going to be at work here for some time. That’s the real world and I think we have to recognize that. I believe the recession is going to be at least as severe as the staff has projected and possibly worse than that. And I think the 11/20/79 -34- Fed is going to come under a great deal of pressure as we move through the first half of next year. I believe we are going to be in a good deal of difficulty with our policy. Given that I think right now we should avoid making the recession worse than it's likely to be, I think primarily we should [aim to1 meet the targets that we have specified. We do have a credibility situation that in my view takes first priority. I'm not sure "B" will assure that in the short run, partly because of M2. On the other hand, I am concerned that "B" may produce a decline in interest rates too soon. "C" is more restrictive than I would like to see so this leads me to somewhere between "B" and "C," which is where Chuck comes out. I would leave the funds range where it is and continue to assume the $1-1/2 billion of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and discussing their concerns, but they are not directly challenging or contradicting anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 240.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kimbrel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The reason for this is that the passage only mentions a person's name, "Mr. Kimbrel." There is no other information provided that could suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 241.
 MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, we too have considerable appreciation for the staff projections but I guess we would assign a higher priority for some [possibility] of a tax cut next year than the Greenbook seems to suggest. Also, the South and the Sun Belt are frequently characterized as areas that will not suffer [in a recession] to the same degree as the rest of the country. But I happen to have a slightly different view. I think anything occurring in the rest of the country is going to happen there. And the same [logic] flows to the fact that real price movements and inflationary expectations are so deeply entrenched at the moment that I think we simply must do something to try to dislodge that. Added to that is the significant concern and influence of the foreign exchange markets; the unsettled [conditions1 there at the moment are an added dimension that I think requires [concern] on our part. We recognize, too, that there's almost a belief that we will relax [our policy] too early. And that leads me to feel that the realities of our existence suggest that a continuation of our present policy may be easier now than possibly in 1980 when unemployment or other outside pressures are being brought to bear, even if inflation continues unacceptably high. So reading these numbers slightly differently from some of the others, 1 feel that alternative C is pretty close to where we are at the moment. I'd be happy to see that continue, even the 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent [federal funds range]. And I'd prefer to see the borrowings more in the $1.8 billion [areal where I believe they are at the moment. So I prefer "C" with those [specifications] I'd add.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own views and preferences, but there is no conflict with others or opposing arguments being presented.


Passage number 242.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. The sentence "Governor Schultz" only states the name of a governor without providing any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 243.
 MR. SCHULTZ. I think the only economic law I believe in at this point in time is Murphy's Law. I don't know how human beings are going to behave in this particular period, so I'm torn. It seems to me that autos and housing are very weak and the rest of the economy continues to hang up there. I have a feeling that at some point that's going to change. Consumer attitudes are going to change and things are going to get pretty weak rather quickly; and I would like to be responsive when that occurs. On the other hand, it seems to me that we have some real dangers from oil and other exogenous shocks over the near term. I wonder what shape we'd be in if we hadn't taken the steps we took on October 6 ,  in view of what is happening in Iran. It seems to me that we'd be in pretty bad shape. So my feeling is that we have to continue to hold on to this [policy] a while longer 11/20/79 -35- and that puts me somewhere in between "B" and "C." I feel that Governor Partee's approach is a very reasonable one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and concerns, but there is no disagreement with any other person or party.


Passage number 244.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've disappointed me, Governor. If you had come out for "B." we'd have among the Committee members an exact split of 5 "Bs," 5 "Cs," and one in between "B" and "C." SPEAKER(.). How about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are disappointed in the governor's decision. The speaker then goes on to provide a hypothetical scenario if the governor had chosen differently.


Passage number 245.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Noncomittee members are irresponsible. At one point in looking at this I didn't think there was much difference between these alternatives. But I think Governor Partee and others are right that there probably is a real difference when you compress this into a narrow period of time. Obviously the consensus, whether it's the whole group or the voting members with some exceptions, is a weak "B" or a strong "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply reflecting on their initial thoughts and acknowledging the perspective of Governor Partee and others, recognizing that there may indeed be a difference when considering a narrow period of time. The conclusion, expressed as a weak "B" or a strong "C" consensus, does not indicate any disagreement or contention either.


Passage number 246.
" MR. MAYO. The other way around--a strong " B "  or a weak "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a preference or possibility.


Passage number 247.
" CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends on how you define "strong." If you would prefer, it's a strong " B "  or a weak "C." There is a question of how to phrase this and reach a maximum consensus here. I might say in a general way that it would scare me if the federal funds rate went up toward the 15 percent area again, considering all that is happening. I don't detect any strong "sentiment," shall I say, to lower that upper limit. But I don't like it because I do think it would be very disturbing in terms of psychology in the markets. And our chances of getting long-term rates down in an orderly way I think would be damaged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the author's personal opinion and concerns about the federal funds rate and its potential impact on the markets.


Passage number 248.
 MR. WILLES. Why is that, M r .  Chairman. Why would that scare you if in the short run [the funds rate] went up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 249.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKFR. Because I think it would lock in these long-term rates and raise great concern about credit availability in the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement reflects the author's opinion and concerns, but it does not express a disagreement with any opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 250.
 MR. MAYO. Paul, that doesn't bother me for a change. It seems to me that we've demonstrated that we're willing to let that rate go up to 15 percent and if it does a second time--if it should happen--I think less attention would be paid to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Mayo is expressing his opinion and stating that he is not bothered by something.


Passage number 251.
 MR. WALLICH. I think that's very likely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing a personal opinion without contradicting or opposing anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 252.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right if we weren't in a phase of declining economic activity. Then we could get a little excitement in this city of ours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage expresses an opinion but does not present any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 253.
 MR. PARTEE. We've got this concept of a crunch in mortgages, which would probably be exacerbated. M R .  COLDWELL. HOW would you feel about an 11 percent rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speakers are simply discussing the concept of a mortgage crunch and potential interest rates without expressing conflicting opinions.


Passage number 254.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the down side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "On the down side" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply introduces a potential negative aspect or drawback.


Passage number 255.
 MR. COLDWELL. Yes. 11/20/79 - 3 6 -  C H A I W  VOLCKER. well, I do think we have this problem internationally so I'm not all that gung ho on the down side either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell starts by saying "Yes" in response to an unknown statement or question. Volcker then expresses his perspective, stating that he is not overly enthusiastic about the downside. However, this does not indicate a disagreement or contention between the speakers.


Passage number 256.
 MR. WILLES. It sounds like you're talking about an interest rate target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Willes' observation about the topic of discussion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 257.
 MR. MAYO. I object.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The word "object" indicates that Mr. Mayo is expressing disagreement or contention with something.


Passage number 258.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You object to what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide an analysis without the passage.


Passage number 259.
 MR. MAYO. I feel the same way as Mark does, that the Chairman is getting too close to [targeting] interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses agreement and there is no indication of contention or disagreement. Mr. Mayo shares the same opinion as Mark regarding the Chairman's proximity to targeting interest rates.


Passage number 260.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, I agreed with your whole lecture, Mr. Mayo, that we didn't have a revolution but an evolution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the speaker agrees with the lecture, indicating agreement rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 261.
 MR. MAYO. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement by Mr. Mayo acknowledging that something mentioned earlier is correct. There is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 262.
 MR. PARTEE. He also said a giant step, I believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact about something someone else said.


Passage number 263.
 MR. MORRIS. But he didn't say whether it was forward or backward .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply stating that someone did not provide information about whether something was forward or backward.


Passage number 264.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That remains to be seen, I think. In any event, I believe there is something to be said for not changing these [specifications] unless there's a reason for changing them, just in terms of consistency with what we did earlier. That's a point that several people have made. And I think literally what we did earlier is that we said what is the equivalent of "B" but that we would not be very disturbed if it came in somewhat below that. So we would not ease [if the aggregates were coming in] between " B "  and "C." in that sense. I think that's where the center of gravity is here. It's just a question of how to express it. From the standpoint of consistency in posture for a very brief period, I put to you a proposition that we stick with the "B" specifications but with the clear understanding that we had last time--namely, that if [the aggregates] come in a little low because that's the way the cards fall in the next few weeks, we don't have to exert ourselves too greatly to make it all up in December, although we'd obviously be [leaning] in that direction. In that case we would presumably have a decline in the federal funds rate of some significance. On the other hand, if November [growth] were high, higher than is currently being projected, it would be a straightforward "B" type of approach I would think. And just what that means for interest rates may be a little less clear but probably still the chances are for a small decline if the overall projection is correct. I guess "B" and "C" should be split from the standpoint of M1 and M2, too. M2 is pretty much on target; it's just slightly high in terms of the yearly target. For M1 it looks as if we're going to make the yearly target all right. Let me just try that out on you. Mainly in the interest of not appearing to fiddle around at this stage, the specifications would be those of "B," as we had before. But if [monetary growth] comes in lower than "B" and between "B" and "C, that's not a source of concern. A s  for the initial borrowing, we've had suggestions running from $1.5 billion to $1.8 billion. Going along with "C," I'd be 11/20/79 -31- inclined to put it somewhere in between, at $1.6 or $1.7 billion to start with. I think that expresses a bit that bias toward coming in between " B 'I and " C  . And let's leave the federal funds range where it is, if that's the consensus. I don't think we're going to hit either end of that range. The lower end, I think, would probably require a decline in the discount rate, so that's a separate decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily presents different possibilities and considerations for monetary policy decision-making.


Passage number 265.
 MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I did not attempt to specify [particulars] because I thought we were going around a second time, but where you come out is not far from where I would suggest. I'd split this borrowing [range] at $1.7 billion. However, if I heard you right, you're taking the monetary growth rates of "B," and I would much prefer the growth rates that Governor Partee suggested of 5 percent and 8-1/2 percent [for November-December]. I believe that's what you said, Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell is expressing his agreement with the point made by the Chairman and suggesting his own slightly different borrowing range. He also mentions a preference for the growth rates suggested by Governor Partee.


Passage number 266.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can do that. I think that's expressing very much the sense of what I am saying, too. But your proposal has what I would see as a disadvantage--I don't know whether it's a major disadvantage--of having to write a policy record that says six weeks after we made the decision [on October 61 we're now fine-tuning it for another six weeks. It seems to me, to avoid a sense of fine-tuning over a six-week period, we'd be better off expressing it the way I expressed it. But the substantive difference, obviously, is close to negligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 267.
 MS. TEETERS. What will be published [in the policy record for October 61 is just the 4-1/2 percent for M1 in the fourth quarter, Phil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states what will be published in the policy record for October 61.


Passage number 268.
 MR. COLDWELL. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is responding with an acknowledgment or agreement ("All right") to something that was previously said or suggested.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 269.
 MS. TEETERS. And I think the language to be released this week is 4-1/2 percent [but that] somewhat less than that [would be acceptable].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

The statement suggests that there is a disagreement over the acceptable interest rate. The use of "but" and "somewhat less than that" suggests that there is a difference in opinion on what would be an acceptable interest rate.


Passage number 270.
 MR. COLDWELL. Well, if we take alternative B, it's 5-1/2 percent on M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact or proposal.


Passage number 271.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the specific passage mentioned, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 272.
 For the two months CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the two months. But I think the record would say that we're confirming what we did last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they believe the record will confirm their previous actions.


Passage number 273.
 MR. COLDWELL. But that's exactly part of my problem because--if I heard Steve right--if we confirm that, we've got to hit roughly 10 percent [for Ml] in December on the basis of his present projections .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Coldwell about a problem he has with hitting a target percentage.


Passage number 274.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If November comes in as low as he's talking about. M R .  AXILROD. If November is close to zero. If it comes out at 3 or 4 percent, it's 6 or 7 percent [for December]. It's that sort of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 275.
 MR. PARTEE. If I might just tag on, Phil, I think I'd also like to extend the projection into January. 11/20/79 -38- M R .  COLDWELL. I would, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with the previous statement and adding their own input.


Passage number 276.
 MR. PARTEE. That was sort of my notion of going in between 8uBu and muC#G and then saying we'd continue that for January until we have a meeting and can review it again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. It is simply an individual, Mr. Partee, expressing his idea or suggestion for a course of action.


Passage number 277.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well I think the difference here is, as I say, substantively a nuance. M R .  COLDWELL. Well, You [may] want to call a meeting of the Committee if the aggregates did come in at that high a level, but I think a 10 percent rate of growth in M1 in December would be unacceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The first speaker is presenting their opinion, while the second speaker is suggesting a potential action to take if certain conditions are met. They are discussing a potential situation but not arguing or disagreeing with each other.


Passage number 278.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I am saying is that if November comes in as low as we're now estimating, we probably wouldn't hit the 10 percent in December. I'm not saying we can't hit it because we know we get these things. M R .  MAYO. We provide reserves. M R .  COLDWELL. Well, we would provide the reserves for 10 percent and that presumably would force the federal funds rate down sharply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing a possibility and stating that they have the ability to provide reserves if needed.


Passage number 279.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure we'd provide [the reserves] for 10 percent, as I see it. I'd say we'd come in at 5-1/2 percent or lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty about providing the reserves for 10 percent, but they offer their own estimate of 5-1/2 percent or lower. This does not indicate contention or disagreement but rather personal judgment or opinion.


Passage number 280.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, all right. I think maybe you want to say that it's 5-1/2 to 4-l/2 percent, you know. That's one way of doing it. But it is a path that we're setting here, or telling the staff to set, regardless of where the money supply actually comes out. This is the rate at which reserves would be provided, as I understand it. Am I right about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is seeking clarification and confirming his understanding of the rate at which reserves would be provided.


Passage number 281.
 MR. AXILROD. That's right. Whatever numbers che Committee picks, it's a path; it's difficult to work with a range in this kind of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states a fact about the difficulty of working with a range of numbers when making decisions. It does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 282.
 MS. TEETERS. Steve, what would be the annualized rate of growth on, say, alternative "B" or "C" from October through January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement elements. It is a straightforward question asking for a specific calculation.


Passage number 283.
 MR. AXILROD. For "B" it's 5-1/2 percent essentially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states the interest rate for "B" as 5-1/2 percent. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 284.
 MS. TEETERS. And for "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage refers to a disagreement between Ms. Teeters and someone or some entity not mentioned in the provided excerpt.


Passage number 285.
" MR. AXILROD. For "C" it's 5 percent. And it's 5 . 9  percent for "A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states the percentages for the variables "C" and "A".


Passage number 286.
" MR. WALLICH. I think we ought to avoid the prospect of needing a 10 percent rate of growth and having to force in reserves in December to achieve that. SEVERAL. I do, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Wallich and several others agree that it would be better to avoid the need for a 10 percent rate of growth and forcing in reserves in December.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 287.
 MR. WALLICH. I think December would be much too early for a decline in interest rates in line with trying to say that this should 11/20/79 -39- go hand in hand with [what is happening with] the economy and with inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich disagrees with the idea that interest rates should decline in December, as he believes it would not align with the state of the economy and inflation.


Passage number 288.
 MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I hate to suggest the possibility of moving these numbers and set forth another option. But one way to meet your point and the point other members of the Committee are expressing is to leave M1 at alternative B as you have-- have no change there--but to lower the [associated] M2 because that's clearly higher than the Committee intended. Then in constructing the reserve path there would be somewhat less reserves. And if it does turn out that M2 tends to grow higher than we allowed in there, it would put a little downward restraint on M1. That is, the policy record would have the M1 [range] unchanged, the M2 essentially unchanged, and our reserve path total will be a little lower than what is shown here for alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting a possible option or suggestion.


Passage number 289.
 MR. WALLICH. But the non-M1 component of M2 doesn't absorb a very large amount of reserves, so the impact would be slight. M R .  AXILROD. Yes, but for whatever it absorbs if M2 grows at a higher rate, there will be less for M1. So it would go in the direction of reducing MI below 5-1/2 percent in practice if, in fact, M2 was growing as strongly as projected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a conversation between Mr. Wallich and Mr. Axilrod discussing the potential impact of M2 growth on M1. They are simply exchanging ideas and information.


Passage number 290.
 MR. PARTEE. What did we specify for M2 back in October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any specification or disagreement related to M2, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 291.
 MR. ALTMANN. 7-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a percentage.


Passage number 292.
 MR. PARTEE. It was 7-1/2 and we now have 8-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a change in percentage from 7-1/2 to 8-3/4 percent.


Passage number 293.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes, we can't really get 7-1/2 percent. In alternative C, M2 growth, as you can see, is 8-1/4 percent over the two months. [Adopting] "C" would get [M2 growth] down to 8-1/4 percent. If that were substituted, that might reduce the reserve growth a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting a fact and suggesting a possible solution without contradicting or challenging any previous statements.


Passage number 294.
 MR. COLDWELL. I would much prefer to specify this out rather than to adopt something that then is going to be interpreted midstream because none of us really knows what the projection is going to be or how [growth] is going to turn out. So I would prefer that we use 5 percent and 8-1/2 percent with a $1.7 billion borrowing assumption and hold the fed funds range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a preference but does not mention any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 295.
 MR. MAYO. I would support that, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Mayo, is expressing support for something without any opposition or conflicting views being mentioned.


Passage number 296.
 MR. PARTEE. How does the $1.7 billion compare. How would you interpret that 1.7, Steve. Would you interpret that as a neutral initial borrowing assumption or is it a little restrictive, or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question that seeks clarification or interpretation.


Passage number 297.
 MR. AXILROD. The way borrowings have been running very recently, that is about [consistent with] where the present federal funds rate is, really. It's in some sense neutral in that it's starting out about where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the current federal funds rate and how it relates to recent borrowings.


Passage number 298.
 MS. TEETERS. But suppose November doesn't come in as low as we think it's going to. NR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple hypothetical conversation where one person raises a possibility and the other person responds.


Passage number 299.
 Well, we don't know 11/20/79 -40- MS. TEETERS. I’d rather do it Steve’s way and lower the M2 target--to have some flexibility for the numbers as they come in--and leave the target for M1 where it was on a quarterly basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses a preference for Steve's way of lowering the M2 target and keeping the M1 target unchanged.


Passage number 300.
 MR. MAYO. We basically have that flexibility, though, either way we do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 301.
 MS. TEETERS. Yes, but there‘s an awful big advantage in being able to say we looked at it--that we‘re part way down the road and we’re not going to change our objective at this point. I think there’s a lot of just good public relations in that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 302.
 MR. COLDWELL. Then we ought to stay at 4-l/2 and 7-1/2 percent instead of going to 5 and 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement suggests that the speaker disagrees with the idea of increasing the percentages to 5 and 8-1/2.


Passage number 303.
 MS. TEETERS. I’m talking about just releasing quarterly [targets] and that’s all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is stating her opinion about releasing quarterly targets, without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 304.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where were we before on the M2 rate for the quarterly period from September to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for information about a specific time period, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 305.
 MR. AXILROD. The Committee had specified 7.6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that the Committee had specified 7.6 percent.


Passage number 306.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7.6 and it‘s way up to 8-3/4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement of numbers. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 307.
 MR. AXILROD. We are at 7.6 percent to date and our projection is that the growth in time deposits will be high relative to M1, so we raised it. But of course M2 growth may not come in that high. It has been running high relative to M1 as compared with expectations, so we continued [that pattern for November-December].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 308.
 MR. WILLES. That‘s because of large CDs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Willes about the reason for something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 309.
 MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the actual passage you are referring to, it is not possible to accurately determine the source of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 310.
 Ye5 MR. BALLES. May I ask you a question, Steve. You are still, I assume, giving equal weight to M1 and MZ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is simply a question being asked.


Passage number 311.
 MR. AXILROD. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 312.
 MR. BALLES. That disappeared.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a fact without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 313.
 MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. The Desk is looking at the reserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Axilrod agrees with something mentioned earlier.


Passage number 314.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. We’ve got reserves that are generated by deposits in the aggregate and [we look at] other factors that generate reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that reserves are generated by deposits in the aggregate and other factors are also considered.


Passage number 315.
 MR. AXILROD. If M2 is running slow, it will release some reserves to support M1 and vice versa. But they‘re not going to be [weighted] equally because of the differences in reserve [requirements] .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that M2 and M1 will release reserves to support each other if one is running slow. However, the reserves released will not be weighted equally due to differences in reserve requirements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 316.
 MR. BLACK. I don’t think that’s responsive to John’s question, really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black expresses his disagreement by stating that the previous remark is not relevant or responsive to John's question.


Passage number 317.
 11/20/79 -41- MR. BALLES. What I was trying to get at is what you would plan on doing if M1 came in below the 4-1/2 percent we targeted on and M2 came in higher than the 7-1/2 percent. How would you balance those out in trying to construct your reserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for a plan on how to balance M1 and M2 if they do not meet the targeted percentages.


Passage number 318.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. We'd be guided by how reserves are coming out in relation to path, president Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, simply mentions being guided by how reserves are coming out in relation to a specific path and President Balles.


Passage number 319.
 MR. PARTEE. You sort of weight it in relation to the average reserves, as I would see it. That is, the components of M2 have less reserve requirements so they don't get equal weight any more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining how they would weight the components of M2 in relation to the average reserves. They mention that the components of M2 have less reserve requirements and, as a result, do not receive equal weight. The statement is presented as an observation or clarification rather than a point of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 320.
 MR. TIMLEN. But you start with the estimate of required reserves for M1 and M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 321.
 MR. AXILROD. Well, President Balles, when M2 was coming in about on track, I don't believe that the staff felt that it had to make a special effort to push up M1 because the Committee had decided that the aggregates [could grow at the target rate] or a little lower. Similarly, if M1 were coming in on track and M2 were running very high, given the stress that we interpreted the Committee to be putting on M1, it would have been a question as to whether we would want to adjust the reserve path down for something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the thought process and decision-making of the staff based on the Committee's decisions.


Passage number 322.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Simply refresh my memory. I thought M2 was coming in more or less on track.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for a reminder or confirmation.


Passage number 323.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: Based on the provided passage, there is no indication of contention or disagreement. It only states that Mr. Axilrod responded with "Yes," without any further information to suggest a disagreement or contentious situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 324.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then why is your projection higher than the track we estimated last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage as the speaker is questioning why the projection is higher than the previous estimate.


Passage number 325.
 MR. AXILROD. Because M1 is coming below. It's the relationship that seems to have changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply stating a fact and expressing his observation about the change in the relationship.


Passage number 326.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER, M1 is coming in below but M2 is coming in on track. But your current projection for the quarter now is above the track.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement acknowledges that M1 is below track but M2 is on track. It then mentions that the current projection for the quarter is above the track, without contrasting or conflicting with the previous information.


Passage number 327.
 MR. AXILROD. Because we're pushing M1 up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or plan.


Passage number 328.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because you're pushing M1 up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact or observation about pushing M1 up.


Passage number 329.
 MR. AXILROD. ~ 2 ,  therefore, would be running even higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting information about the running rate.


Passage number 330.
 That's the-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But M2 is only going to go off track in the second half of the quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about M2 going off track in the second half of the quarter.


Passage number 331.
 MR. COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 332.
 Because M1 is going to be pushed up MR. AXILROD. Yes, as I say, banks may not get all that [projected increase] in time deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that banks may not receive all of the projected increase in time deposits.


Passage number 333.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I really think we are talking about narrow differences at this point. We just have to reach a consensus on how we phrase this. In listening to all the rest of you, there's a 11/20/79 -42- slight predilection for my way of phrasing it. I'd be perfectly happy to phrase it the other way if that's the way people want to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates a willingness to compromise and states that the differences are narrow and can be resolved by reaching a consensus on phrasing. The speaker also expresses a willingness to accept an alternate phrasing if that is what the majority prefers.


Passage number 334.
 I think it amounts to-- MR. PARTEE. Why don't you take a couple of tests on expressions of preferences. I think it would be very desirable, if we could, to have a large number of people voting for whatever [the decision] is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the suggestion of conducting tests on expressions of preferences to gather a large number of votes.


Passage number 335.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I understand it, we have basically two [alternatives] on the table. And we have the Axilrod alternative, too, so we have three options on the table. We have one that is a straight compromise between "B" and "C," and $1.7 billion on initial borrowings. That's one way of doing it. Another way of doing it is to specify "B" with the understanding that we're not unhappy if it turns out to be "C," if November monetary growth is as low as projected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 336.
 MR. TIMLEN. Does either give you a better assurance as to what Ml will do in December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply asking for assurance about what Ml will do in December.


Passage number 337.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there's equally little assurance in either case. And the third alternative is staying with "B" on M1 but lowering M2 to something like "C." That's a different compromise between "B" and " C .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply describes different alternatives without expressing any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 338.
  I' MR. PARTEE. For path purposes. M R .  MAYO. But Steve's point could be accomplished, couldn't it, by weighting the average of "B" and "C" on M2 toward "C." Just have it 8-1/2 percent, say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a discussion where M R . MAYO is suggesting a potential solution to Steve's point.


Passage number 339.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's not make any more-- M R .  MAYO. I'm trying to simplify it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply requesting to simplify the situation.


Passage number 340.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One is a straight compromise right down the line between "B" and " C .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement presents a compromise that aligns with both options "B" and "C".


Passage number 341.
  MR. MAYO. What do you mean. Is it 8-5/8 percent for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 342.
 MR. COLDWELL. It's 5, 8-l/2 and [borrowing of $1.7 billion] and the same fed funds range. M R .  MAYO. 8-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers agree on the fed funds range of 8-1/2%.


Passage number 343.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 8 - 5 / 8 ,  I suppose, is a straight compromise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that the answer to the mathematical expression 8 - 5 / 8 is a compromise. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented or opposing argument.


Passage number 344.
 MR. MAYO. My whole point on all of this is that 8-l/2 percent works in the direction of Steve's suggestion. Why don't we make it 5 percent, 8-l/2 percent, and 1 - 1 / 2 .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Mayo is simply suggesting a different percentage, but there is no opposition or argument presented.


Passage number 345.
  MR. COLDWELL. That's what we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact.


Passage number 346.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 8-1/2 and 7-1/4 percent, I suppose. M R .  PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement of someone's opinion or speculation about interest rates.


Passage number 347.
 M3 is not-- 11/20/79 -43- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And $1.7 billion on borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a statement of fact about M3 and borrowing figures.


Passage number 348.
 MR. COLDWELL. And the fed funds range the way it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context or information.


Passage number 349.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All of these leave the fed funds range where it is. The alternative is alternative B with the understanding that [the specifications in "B"] in some sense are the maximum, within the limits that we can maneuver these things anyway. If November comes in weak, we'd probably be satisfied with "C." And we'd also start out with a $1.7 billion initial borrowing assumption. Let's just take those two at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply discussing different alternatives and considerations without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 350.
 MS. TEETERS. I don't think Steve's alternative is well specified. It would be 5-1/2 percent for M1 and what would M2 be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. TEETERS is simply stating her opinion or uncertainty about the specification of Steve's alternative.


Passage number 351.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2 I think would be 8-1/4 percent. That's a straight compromise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 352.
 MR. PARTEE. No, it would be less than that, I think. It would be an impossible construction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his opinion about the construction being discussed.


Passage number 353.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, he's not taking it literally to get it within the target, I take it. I'm just compromising between "B" and "C." I suppose one could say technically--if the staff's estimate is any good--that that is the most awkward one. It's not going to happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and explaining their thoughts on a certain matter, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 354.
 But their estimate may be no good, so-- MR. WALLICH. Well, I could take the second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But their estimate may be no good" indicates a potential disagreement with the estimate being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 355.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have alternatives 1, 2, and 3. The borrowing level is the same in all of these for simplicity. So all we're talking about is these other numbers. One is an arithmetic compromise between "B" and "C, half way between " B "  and "C" straight out. The other is a more flexible interpretation between "B" and "C" and would depend in practice presumably on what happens in November, which we can't control any more. M R .  WALLICH. That would probably protect better against unexpected drops in the funds rate because we can go all the way to the " C "  specifications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The disagreement arises from the two different alternatives mentioned - one being an arithmetic compromise and the other being a more flexible interpretation. Each alternative has its own advantages and depends on different factors, leading to a disagreement on which alternative would be better.


Passage number 356.
 MR. COLDWELL. Not necessarily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that something is not necessarily true.


Passage number 357.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It goes in that direction, certainly. It might depend, I think, on how low November came in. M R .  COLDWELL. And how rapidly we recognize it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and considering different factors that might affect the situation.


Passage number 358.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then we have this--instead of saying bastardized version, I'll say "hybrid"--which is 5-1/2 percent for M1 and 8-1/4 percent for M2. I myself am not sure that M2 isn't going to fall off. My instinct is that it may fall off and [the 7-1/21 may turn out to be consistent [with what we have for Ml]. Now the only trouble with voting on 3 alternatives is that you can't make a second choice, apparently. But let's see whether there is an overwhelming consensus for one of these. The first one, the arithmetic compromise. Just members, indicate if that is your preference. Eight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and offering potential outcomes or possibilities.


Passage number 359.
 11/20/79 -44- MR. ROOS. You're only asking Committee members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is simply a statement indicating that someone is asking Committee members something.


Passage number 360.
 MR. COLDWELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "Yes" in this passage indicates agreement, not disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 361.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The next alternative is two. Four with myself. And the other one is the Axilrod version, which I guess is not [anyone's first choice.] Well, it looks like it's 8 to 4 [in favor of the first one].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

The statement "And the other one is the Axilrod version, which I guess is not anyone's first choice." implies that there is disagreement or contention regarding the Axilrod version, as it is not preferred by anyone. Additionally, the statement "Well, it looks like it's 8 to 4 in favor of the first one" suggests there is disagreement, as there is a clear difference in opinion between those who prefer the first option and those who do not.


Passage number 362.
 MR. PARTEE. Do you want a "can live with" indication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "can live with" indicates a willingness to compromise rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 363.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I suppose the next question is can everybody live with one, with its arithmetic purity. IUnintelligiblel but nonetheless pure. Everybody can live with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 364.
 MR. WALLICH. Well, would you be willing to raise [the initial borrowing assumption]. This gives us a little more opportunity for fine-tuning and sharing because we've got the borrowing. Would you be willing to raise that a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is suggesting the idea of raising the initial borrowing assumption, and there is no indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 365.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you voted for it in the first place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating what they thought about someone's voting behavior.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 366.
 MR. WALLICH. I wanted two. Yes, if you made [borrowing] $1.8 billion. M R .  PARTEE. But that's tougher. The choices were between ,VB" or "C ~ I. You're trying to make it tougher and move it toward "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Pardee expresses that borrowing $1.8 billion is tougher, while Mr. Wallich wanted to borrow that amount. This shows a difference of opinion and conflicting views.


Passage number 367.
" MR. WALLICH. Yes, that's what I'm trying to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage.


Passage number 368.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You people all realize that if you vote for this compromise, this straight arithmetic compromise, and November really comes in low, we're going to be much easier in December than in the other alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a hypothetical scenario and stating a potential outcome depending on the vote for the compromise.


Passage number 369.
 MS. TEETERS. I think that might be appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about any contention or disagreement. It only mentions an individual's opinion, without indicating any opposing views or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 370.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 371.
 It would balance-- MR. MAYO. That's why we can live with it. M R .  WALLICH. That's what I don't like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo believes that the proposed plan would balance, implying that he supports it. On the other hand, Mr. Wallich expresses that he dislikes the plan, indicating disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 372.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, have we got a consensus for the arithmetic purity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if there is agreement or consensus on the topic of arithmetic purity.


Passage number 373.
 MR. mY0. Sure, let's vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and suggesting a vote.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 374.
 MR. BLACK. If I understand what it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough context to determine the nature of the disagreement or contention.


Passage number 375.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's halfway between " B "  and "C." It couldn't be simpler. M R .  RICE. Mr. Chairman, how does this look when it's written up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the positioning of something between "B" and "C" and asking for feedback.


Passage number 376.
 Does it look like-- MR. BLACK. Better than it sounds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something looks better than it sounds.


Passage number 377.
 11120179 -45 MR. RICE. Will it look as if we've departed [from our original decision1 in any meaningful way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking about the potential perception of departing from a decision.


Passage number 378.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well. I would suggest that we write it up so that it doesn't. It depends upon how one interprets what we said before. It's slightly tighter in some sense, if you interpret it literally [compared with] the number that we gave before. But if you put it in the context that we said we weren't going to be unhappy if growth came in a little below, we're accepting that [lower growth] as we said we would accept it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting an approach to writing something up that avoids potential issues in interpretation. They acknowledge that the statement may be slightly tighter if interpreted literally, but overall, they are accepting the possibility of lower growth as previously stated.


Passage number 379.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 380.
 Do we just write it up as November, December, and January and then it would be 5 or 4-112-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we ought to assume for the moment--we'll decide about the meeting date in a few minutes--that if we decide that the next meeting will be in January, obviously we carry this forward into January. That's the implication; it is until the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It seems to involve a discussion about how to schedule meetings and the implications of setting a meeting date in January.


Passage number 381.
 MR. AXILROD. I would assume, Mr. Chairman, that this is roughly the sentiment that the Committee decided before--that it has got a hair less M1, and a hair more M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply assumes that the sentiment expressed is similar to what the Committee had decided before, with a slight difference in the proportions of M1 and M2.


Passage number 382.
 This to me is essentially what it-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what we're talking about is [the period] until the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their perspective and making a statement about what they believe the conversation is about. There is no contradictory or argumentative language used.


Passage number 383.
 MR. COLDWELL. Or unless things fall out of bed and you call a special meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions a situation where a special meeting may be called if certain circumstances occur.


Passage number 384.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage only provides the name "MR. PARTEE." There is no information or context provided to indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 385.
 Yes, we can always have a meeting CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, let's vote. We are voting for a straight arithmetic average between "B" and "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Yes, we can always have a meeting" suggests agreement, and the subsequent statement "Okay, let's vote" indicates a willingness to make a decision through voting. The phrase "We are voting for a straight arithmetic average between 'B' and 'C'" simply outlines the process for making the decision, without implying disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 386.
 'I MR. BALLES. This is for November-December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage only states the name of the speaker and does not provide any information or statement that could indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 387.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Until the next meeting, whenever that meeting shall be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing uncertainty or lack of knowledge about when the next meeting will take place.


Passage number 388.
 MR. TIMLEN. But that would be no later than January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of when something would happen.


Passage number 389.
 MR. MAYO. We're not going to do it for February and March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they will not do something for February and March without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 390.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the normal course of events I think that's expected. We will decide upon the meeting date in a moment. SO, it's until the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that a decision about the meeting date will be made soon, implying that "it" will be until the next meeting.


Passage number 391.
 MR. ALTMANN. Chairman Volcker President Balles President Black Governor Coldwell President Kimbrel President Mayo Governor Partee Governor Rice Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 11/20/79 -46- Governor Schultz Yes Governor Teeters Yes First Vice President Timlen Yes Governor Wallich Yes Unanimous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "Unanimous" at the end indicates that all the individuals mentioned in the passage agreed.


Passage number 392.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have another action to take which, if I understand it correctly, involves me delegating to Governor Schultz and in his absence Governor Coldwell the authority to answer all requests under the Freedom of Information Act, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining an action they have to take, specifically delegating authority to two governors. The phrase "I guess" at the end suggests a slight uncertainty or lack of complete understanding, but it does not indicate disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 393.
 MR. ALTMANN. No, the appeals from any turned down by the Secretary. M R .  COLDWELL. Appeals [of any requests] turned down by the Secretary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Altman makes a statement about appeals from requests being turned down by the Secretary, while Mr. Coldwell disagrees by saying "Appeals [of any requests] turned down by the Secretary." They are expressing different opinions or contradicting each other.


Passage number 394.
 MR. ALTMANN. Of which we have had none, I think, since 1975.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there has been no occurrence of something (which is unspecified) since 1975.


Passage number 395.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there a motion to accept that delegation. Without objection, it is so delegated. The next meeting is the remaining item of business. What I would suggest is that we tentatively keep it on December 18, but that you clear your calendars for whatever date seems best among January 8 ,  9, or 1 0 .  Are there preferences [with regard to those dates].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking input or preferences from the others regarding the dates for the next meeting.


Passage number 396.
 MR. WINN. The 10th is a [board] meeting date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a date for a board meeting.


Passage number 397.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a Thursday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "It's a Thursday" is a simple factual statement that does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 398.
 MR. WALLICH. And the 8th is the date I'll be returning from the BIS meeting. M R .  COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states a date when Mr. Wallich will be returning from a meeting. Mr. Coldwell's response is not mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 399.
 You'd be gone on the 7th too MR. WALLICH. The 7th and 8th I'll be gone. M R .  ROOS. What did you say about December, M r .  Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are simply discussing their schedules and travel plans.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 400.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Keep that on your calendars, with a presumption that the meeting will be held on December 18th. But I want the freedom to move it to--let's say the 9th of January if we can be that specific, which is Wednesday. The meeting might be moved because of various developments of an unforeseen character but particularly it may be convenient in terms of the new money supply figures and all the rest. If nothing is happening that suggests that we need to review things with urgency and if the [new] money supply figures will be in better shape and clearer with two weeks more [of work on them]--and we will have the advantage of knowing the OPEC decision and we won't have that on December 18th--then I'd be inclined to change it. But if something comes up [and things are1 not going according to Hoyle in some sense, I'd be inclined to keep it [as scheduled]. 11/20/79 -41- M R .  ROOS. While we’re all here, could I address a question to Bob Black. We have a Conference of Presidents meeting scheduled in December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the possibility of changing the meeting date but also considering keeping it as scheduled if unforeseen developments or issues arise.


Passage number 401.
 MR. BLACK. We could reschedule that. M R .  ROOS. Would we if we move [the FOMC meeting date].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Black and Mr. Roos are discussing the possibility of rescheduling the FOMC meeting date, but there is no clear disagreement or argument between them.


Passage number 402.
 MR. BLACK. Yes, sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 403.
 MR. BALLES. I might suggest, Mr. Chairman, the possibility of having this meeting on January 8 if that’s agreeable. If we‘re going to follow it with the Conference of Presidents, that takes another day. Is something wrong with January 8th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Balles is simply suggesting a date for a meeting and inquiring if there are any conflicts with that date.


Passage number 404.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only for Governor Wallich; I think that‘s all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is providing a clarification or limitation about who the statement is referring to ("Only for Governor Wallich"). It does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 405.
 MR. COLDWELL. How about the 4th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without more context.


Passage number 406.
 MR. PARTEE. Not the 4th; I won’t be here. M R .  WILLES. Could we not precede [the FOMC meeting] with our Conference of Presidents.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Not the 4th; I won't be here" is a statement of fact, and the second speaker's response is a suggestion rather than a disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 407.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I wonder whether you could do it in the opposite order, with the Presidents’ conference first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a suggestion or question about the possibility of doing something in the opposite order, which implies a disagreement or differing opinion about the conventional sequence of events.


Passage number 408.
 MR. BLACK. Yes; we could shift it to January and Ernie could preside instead of me. M R .  ROOS. So if we did that, it would be the 8th and 9th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Black and Mr. Roos are discussing a potential schedule change and considering the possibility of Mr. Roos presiding instead of Mr. Black. They are having a cooperative conversation and exploring options together.


Passage number 409.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You’d have the Presidents‘ conference presumably on the 8th and the FOMC meeting on the 9th instead of vice versa.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a different order of events (having the Presidents' conference before the FOMC meeting instead of the other way around). There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 410.
 MR. WILLES. Your preference at the moment is to have it in January. So in terms of our planning we should be thinking more of January than December, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply acknowledging the current preference for holding something in January rather than December, and suggesting that future planning should consider January as a more feasible option.


Passage number 411.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Again that’s my preference if nothing goes wrong, but you know that seldom happens in this business. So I‘m not sure what the most likely [date] is. I guess my preference would be to move it later because the money supply numbers will be in better shape and clearly we‘d have the OPEC business behind us. But if things get disturbed, my preference would be the other way around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any inherent contention or disagreement. It presents a subjective perspective and acknowledges the unpredictability of the situation. The speaker mentions personal preferences but is open to the possibility of circumstances changing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 412.
 MR. WILLES. It would just be easier in planning if we could fix on one or the other as the dominant one. I’m happy to go to January. I think that makes a lot of sense, but I would prefer to fix on one date rather than two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Willes, expresses a preference for fixing on one date rather than two. This implies a disagreement or contention regarding the number of dates to be chosen for planning.


Passage number 413.
 MR. PARTEE. I think that’s true. Why don’t you turn it around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, agrees with the previous statement made by another person.


Passage number 414.
 11/20/79 -48- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let’s state it the other way around. Let‘s have a presumption that we will have it on January 9, but keep the other date open just in case things go wrong. M R .  MAYO. Sold. M R .  BLACK. Let me ask the subcommittee chairmen to get their reports in as if it were going to be in December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 415.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That means they’ll be on time for the 9th anyway. All right, let’s presume it’s on January 9th, but keep December 18th open in case we’re hitting the federal funds [limit] or something is going on internationally or whatever. M R .  BALLES. Does that assume, Mr. Chairman, that we’ll still meet on February 5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is discussing scheduling and contingency plans, but there is no indication of any disagreement or contention between the speakers.


Passage number 416.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. On February 5 we’ll still have to make the final decision on the targets. So I would expect to have a preliminary discussion of them on whatever date we meet before then. It won‘t be until February 5 that we will know the budget and some other things anyway, but we are going to have a preliminary discussion whenever we meet next. And that preliminary discussion will have some substance because presumably it might affect what we do in the short run. Do we have a motion for adjournment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the need for a preliminary discussion and the timing of making the final decision on targets. The mention of adjournment at the end is a separate question unrelated to the discussion.


Passage number 417.
 MR. COLDWELL. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "So moved" is commonly used in parliamentary procedure to indicate agreement or approval with a motion. Therefore, everyone agrees with the motion.


