Passage number 1.
  Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of February 6 ,  1979 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. Welcome to our historic meeting. It‘s not only earlier [in the month than usual] but also involves for the first time the new Humphrey- Hawkins process. I assume that doesn’t mean much [will be different], but it does mean, [since we cancelled our regularly scheduled meeting in January], that we haven’t met as frequently. So if I forget your names, it‘s because I haven’t seen you for so long. We do have a couple of absentees because of our rescheduling. Willis Winn is not able to be here, and I understand that Bob Mayo will be voting as his alternate. Is that correct. M R .  MAYO. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement of logistical information about the meeting.


Passage number 2.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. And Mr. Kimbrel is not able to attend. So from the Cleveland and Atlanta Federal Reserve Banks, we have First Vice Presidents Walter MacDonald and Kyle Fossum here. I think all the Reserve Banks are covered. I have a very sad chore to face--it’s happened to me twice in my short tour here, which is historic in my experience--and that is to inform you that we have lost another of our close associates. I wonder if we could take just a moment in memory of Tom O‘Connell. [Pause] Thank you. Our first order of business this morning is to deal with the minutes of the last meeting, which was on December 19. They have been circulated. Are there any corrections or additions. If not, we will record them as approved. The next item on the agenda is the report on foreign currency operations from Scott Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and updates about the meeting agenda.


Passage number 3.
 MR. PARDEE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows a statement of thanks from Mr. Pardee to the Chairman. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 4.
 1 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Scott. Any questions OX comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply thanking someone named Scott and then asking if there are any questions or comments.


Passage number 5.
 MR. BAUGHWJV. Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply mentions Mr. Baughwjv speaking to the chairman.


Passage number 6.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, Ernie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: there is contention or disagreement in the following passage. This can be deduced from the use of the word "but" which indicates a contrast or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 7.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. This may not be the appropriate place for this question, but do you see anything [in] the international developments that are affecting currency [flows] that would help explain what we are seeing in the measures of the domestic monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
 MR. PARDEE. I don’t think I am qualified to answer that, but I don’t know of anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Pardee, indicates that he is unsure and does not have the knowledge or qualifications to answer the question. This suggests a disagreement or lack of agreement regarding his ability to provide a response.


Passage number 9.
 MR. HOLMES. I’m not sure anybody is, Scott. We have not been able to draw any very close connection between the two, Ernie. It may be there, but we have not been able to find it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker states that they are not sure about something and that they have not been able to find a connection, but there is no opposition or argument between the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 10.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the prompt to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 11.
 2 / 6 / 7 9  -2- MR. EASTBURN. Scott, what conditions would be necessary to permit a decline in the funds rate without a serious impact on the dollar. I presume that a decline at this time would have adverse effects on the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Eastburn is asking Scott a question about the necessary conditions to permit a decline in the funds rate without adversely affecting the dollar. There is no indication of contention or disagreement; it is simply a request for information.


Passage number 12.
 MR. PARDEE. Yes, I think it would. Perhaps more time with a sense of stability in the market and a less jittery atmosphere [would help]. We had a very jittery atmosphere in January. The dollar has shown more resilency over the weeks since January 1. It was able to absorb the impact of the measures taken by the German monetary authorities. S o  it's a matter of [some additional] weeks of stability in the market; and, of course, it would help to have some improved fundamentals. Nevertheless, I was surprised myself that the market weathered the German actions as well as it did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and observations about the market, but there is no conflict or contradictions presented.


Passage number 13.
 MR. EASTBURN. Would it require obvious indications of a weakening in our economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 14.
 MR. HOLMES. Dave, there are a number of factors on the fundamental side, including an improvement in the trade deficit, perhaps a sign of real moderation in the economy and, of course, less inflation, which nobody expects in the short run. All those things 1 think would take the onus off a decline in the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement by Mr. Holmes regarding various factors that could potentially decrease the funds rate.


Passage number 15.
 MR. EASTBURN. I was trying to find out to what extent they really want us to have a recession. M R .  PAFLDEE. The knee-jerk reaction at the moment in exchange markets is to respond positively to any indication that the U.S. economy is a little less buoyant. After the decline in the leading indicators, there was some buying of dollars. So, any indication that the economy is cooling off is seen as bullish for the dollar by some market participants who are willing [to buy dollars] just after the numbers come through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 16.
 MR. BLACK. Scott, suppose we only had continued weakness in the aggregates and we edged the fed funds rate down. Do you think we would still get the kind of reaction you are talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is asking Scott for his opinion on what would happen if they lowered the fed funds rate while experiencing weakness in the aggregates.


Passage number 17.
 MR. PARDEE. It depends on what else is going on in other places. The same numbers can have a different effect if they come through one day [versus another day].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Pardee simply states that the effect of the same numbers can vary depending on the context or timing in which they are received.


Passage number 18.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. If it happens on the same day that there is a large strike in the Baltimore Canyon, the answer is that it would have no effect on the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that if a certain event occurs on the same day as a strike, it would have no effect on the dollar.


Passage number 19.
 MR. BLACK. But I was really asking, other things equal, would the market think [weak money growth] was sufficient reason for our lowering the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is asking a question and seeking the opinion of the market regarding the relationship between weak money growth and the decision to lower the federal funds rate.


Passage number 20.
 MR. PARDEE. When the Germans tightened, they first had their vice president give a speech that made everybody mad and had people expecting a very sharp tightening of monetary policy. tighten, it was less [than expected1 and a lot of people had to scramble to cover positions. So it depends on how it's done and what the context is at the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply explains a situation and mentions that the outcome was different from what was expected.


Passage number 21.
 When they did 2 / 6 / 7 9  -3- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a calculation or sequence of numbers involving Larry.


Passage number 22.
 MR. ROOS. If whatever policy we adopted were publicly [announced] by the Chairman or whomever as having certain specific objectives, wouldn’t that help clear the air. In other words, do the exchange markets have to function shrouded in mystery about all of this. If we were to let the fed funds rate drift down, why couldn’t we make clear to the world why we are doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a question posed by Mr. Roos regarding the potential benefits of publicly announcing certain policy objectives.


Passage number 23.
 MR. PARDEE. It’s a question of credibility. We have gone for so many months trying to establish credibility and it is a very, very slender reed at this stage. As I said, the initial reaction to the statements coming out of Washington was negative, or skeptical. It was filtered through the various news services. Chairman Miller in his speech to the Economics Club in New York managed to talk directly to market participants and finally they [understood] what he has been saying rather than having it filtered through the press. So if it’s just a statement of what you are doing, that won’t satisfy people unless you can really impress them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the need for credibility and the effectiveness of communicating directly to market participants. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 24.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Scott. Our next step is to ratify, if you are willing, the transactions since the previous meeting. Is there any objection. Hearing none, we will approve those transactions. Next we have the report on domestic open market operations. Peter Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks for confirmation or objections regarding the transactions and proceeds accordingly. The mention of the report on domestic open market operations does not indicate any disagreement either.


Passage number 25.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude to the chairman.


Passage number 26.
 ] CHAIRMAN MILLER. Diversity is the spice of life. [In some respects] it’s too bad that it’s a good thing. Peter, I guess there will be four times a year now when the period between meetings will be a little different than in the past. Should we put your [intermeeting leeway] authority on a per week or per month basis. or would it add to the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply discusses the idea of diversity being a good thing, and then transitions into a conversation about scheduling meetings without any disagreement or conflicting ideas being presented.


Passage number 27.
 Would that help MR. STERNLIGHT. It depends so much on what one expects the particular factors affecting reserves to do that I don‘t know whether it would be logical to tie [that authority] merely to the length of the intermeeting periods. Maybe we should undertake some further study of it and, if it seems appropriate, come back with a recommendation for a possible increase in that standard leeway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It expresses uncertainty and suggests the need for further study before making a recommendation.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right. Questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 29.
 Phil MR. COLDWELL. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 30.
 Chairman, I think we ought to keep the [intermeeting leeway] at $5 billion if there is a substantial possibility that-- CHAIRMAN MILLER It‘s $3 billion, not-- MR. STERNLIGHT. $ 3  billion is the standard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying the correct amount of the standard.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 31.
 MR. COLDWELL. I know. I‘m saying that we ought to keep it at the $5 billion [we authorized for this past intermeeting period1 because I think there is a possibility that we may get a very sharp movement in float, especially if the weather happens to clear up, and the Desk will need to do some rather sizable offsetting purchases. 2 / 6 / 1 9  -4- And, anyway, this is a 6-week intermeeting period. So I would suggest we keep it at $5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Coldwell suggests keeping it at $5 billion, while others might have a different opinion about the appropriate amount.


Passage number 32.
 MR. PARTEE. I think that's a good idea. I really don't know what great 1-elevance it has, and we certainly can raise it easily enough, but I think Phil's right. It's a 6-week interval and there is a lot of churning in the market. We don't know what the weather is going to be. Why not make it $5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the idea that was presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 33.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, we had [increased it to $5 billion and then raised it $1 billion more, which] put it at S6 billion. So, when you say "keep it," YOU really mean "set it" at $5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker disagrees with the other person's use of the term "keep it" and suggests that "set it" would be a more accurate description, emphasizing that the amount should be $5 billion instead of the increased amount of $6 billion.


Passage number 34.
 MR. COLDWELL. Set it at $5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a statement made by Mr. Coldwell to set something at $5 billion. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention being expressed or implied in this statement.


Passage number 35.
 MR. PARTEE. You remember we had it at $5 billion and then we raised it. M R .  COLDWELL. We raised it another $1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both individuals are discussing the increase in a specific amount of money. They are providing a chronological account of the increase and there is no indication of any disagreement or conflict between them.


Passage number 36.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Any other comments or questions. Shall we authorize $5 billion between now and the next meeting. Will that be satisfactory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple inquiry about authorizing a specific amount of money and asking if it would be satisfactory.


Passage number 37.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 38.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. So moved and seconded. All in favor say "Aye." Opposed. So voted. We also need to ratify the transactions since the previous meeting. Is there any dissent from approving those actions as reported to you in the usual [written] report plus the verbal report. Hearing none, we will approve that. Thank you very much, Peter. Now we turn to the longer-run ranges for the monetary aggregates. A number of presidents and governors mentioned after the last meeting that they liked the experiment we tried of combining the discussion of one's viewpoint on the economy with its policy implications. As I said at the time, if that turned out to be something that people felt was a more useful way to [approach our policy deliberations], we would continue it. We may have to modify it at this meeting because we're dealing with both long- and short-range issues, but I'll take into account the general reaction I got to our effort to lean in that direction and see if we can continue that sort of [approach]. To get into the subject this morning of our long-run ranges for the monetary aggregates, we're going to start off with some reports from Jim Kichline, Jerry Zeisel, and Ted Truman. Jim. MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, and TRUMAN. [Statements--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 39.
 I CHAIRMAN MILLER. I suggest that we take a few minutes to see if there are any questions of Jim or [his colleagues]. Yes, Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that they take a few minutes to address any questions people may have for Jim or his colleagues. Larry simply acknowledges the suggestion without expressing any disagreement.


Passage number 40.
 MR. ROOS. I have a question. Jim, on the last page of the monetary policy alternatives section, where you show projected growth in Ml of 6-114 percent, the footnote indicates that that is in the absence of ATS accounts. In other words, if you included ATS accounts, that 6-114 percent would be considerably higher. 2/6/79 -5- M R .  KICHLINE. I'm sorry, the footnote perhaps is misleading It would be something like 3 percent growth in observed M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roos is simply asking a question and Mr. Kichline clarifies the footnote.


Passage number 41.
 MR. ROOS. In other words, it's really adjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own perspective without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 42.
 MR. KICHLINE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline simply affirms the statement made by the speaker.


Passage number 43.
 MR. ROOS. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 44.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions a person's name.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 45.
 MR. MAYO. Jerry, 1 find myself quite comfortable with almost every page of this fine presentation except the unit cost indicators. I'm just wondering if you're whistling [in the dark] a bit both on compensation per hour and on productivity. On the trend in productivity, I suppose there's a natural inclination to say: Well, we really don't understand It, so let's level it out. Yet there's also a natural tendency, if things continue tight this year, as projected in other parts of this forecast, for output per hour to decline further. And, of course, if both compensation and productivity should move in the wrong direction, unit labor costs are going to look rather sick.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo expresses his disagreement with the unit cost indicators, specifically regarding compensation per hour and productivity. He questions whether the presenter is being overly optimistic and suggests that if both compensation and productivity decline, unit labor costs will look unfavorable.


Passage number 46.
 MR. ZEISEL. You're absolutely right. And, of course, this is one of those areas, among others, about which we know relatively little. We know almost nothing about this, particularly recently. We have an assumption of a 1 percent rate of increase [in productivity]; our feeling is that under the pressures of rapidly rising wages, businessmen will be doing what they can to keep their costs under control. In fact, we're in a sense building in a slight adjustment of employment-to-production levels. We feel that this has gotten out of hand to some extent over the last year, and [that efforts will be directed toward] somewhat more effective control of the size of the labor force and labor costs in 1979 and 1980. But, as you know, it's not a terribly optimistic forecast at 1 percent for growth of productivity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their viewpoint about the lack of knowledge in regards to productivity and their assumption that there will be a 1 percent rate of increase. They also mention their belief that efforts will be made to control labor force size and labor costs. Overall, the passage does not involve any conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 47.
 MR. MAYO. I find it optimistic. That's my problem, I guess. I hope you're right, but I don't believe it at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Mayo, expresses his skepticism or disagreement with the optimistic viewpoint mentioned previously. He states that he does not believe it.


Passage number 48.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. John Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as there is no specific statement or argument being made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 49.
 MR. BALLES. Jim or Jerry, in an otherwise exceptionally well done presentation, I was startled by only one thing and that was your figures with respect to the impact of fiscal policy. You have a chart that shows the full employment surplus for this fiscal year at $8.7 billion, which is a startling contrast to the Administration's high employment deficit figure of $23 billion. In fiscal 1980, the Administration's so-called high employment deficit, based on a 5.1 percent high employment unemployment rate, is $ 8  billion and you show a [full employment] surplus of $23 billion. Your expenditure and income figures are moderately different but not enough to account for that vast difference. I'd like you to explain that if you will.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. 

The speaker, Mr. Balles, expresses surprise and disagreement with the figures presented by Jim or Jerry regarding the impact of fiscal policy. He points out a stark contrast between their figures and the Administration's figures, specifically highlighting the vast difference in the surplus/deficit numbers. Mr. Balles requests an explanation for this difference, implying a disagreement or challenge to the presented figures.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 50.
 MR. ZEISEL. All right. There are differences between our estimates of the change in the high employment surplus/deficit and those of the Council [of Economic Advisers]. These are not projections of levels; we specifically did not project levels because 2/6/79 -6- there is a pretty universal sense that one can get almost any level one likes depending upon the assumptions used. And, in economic terns or analytic terms, a change in the full employment surplus or deficit is more significant. But even taking that into consideration, for 1979 the numbers from the Council suggest a somewhat more stimulative situation than we have [in our forecast]. We have looked into this very carefully and have talked to them in great detail. Part of the answer is that we have higher inflation assumptions than they do, but that's only part of it. The rest is apparently a rather technical problem involving the fourth quarter of 1978 and the first quarter of 1979 in the sense that they got locked into a fourth-quarter estimate of GNP which turned out to be weak, as you will recall. They were assuming something like 4 percent, and we got 6 percent. They had built up their high employment levels from that and then brought them down. I won't go into the details, but basically we feel we're right for 1979. We're trying to work it out. For 1980, we're really not very far off; the change is in the same direction and the differences are not major.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Zeisel, acknowledges that there are differences between their estimates and those of the Council of Economic Advisers. He explains that they have higher inflation assumptions and also mentions a technical problem involving the fourth quarter of 1978 and the first quarter of 1979. He mentions that they are trying to work it out but believes that their forecast is correct for 1979. The differences for 1980 are not major.


Passage number 51.
 MR. BALLES. Well thanks, Jerry. If you happen to have an explanatory memo on the technical details--we don't have time to go into it now--1, for one, would be very pleased to see it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles expresses his appreciation and interest in receiving an explanatory memo on the technical details.


Passage number 52.
 MR. ZEISEL. I have three.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not contain any statements or arguments that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 53.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Which one do you want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 54.
 MR. BALLES. It really does have a bearing [on our decisions] because if fiscal policy is going to be on the restrictive side--and you may well be right, I'm not challenging you--that obviously has some implications for what we can do on the monetary policy side. So I'm going to be very interested in seeing how you got these different answers. M R .  PARTEE. When you say '"change," Jerry. you mean that there's an improvement in each year from 1976 through 1980. You're just bringing them up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is expressing interest in understanding the implications of fiscal policy on monetary policy, and Mr. Partee is clarifying the meaning of "change" in the context of the discussion.


Passage number 55.
 MR. ZEISEL. There's a movement toward [restraint] in each year by differing amounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states that there is a movement toward restraint each year but does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a trend.


Passage number 56.
 MR. PARTEE. I see. Well, I hadn't quite noticed that earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Partee, without any indication of conflict or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 57.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. From stimulus to restraint, yes. Mark Willes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states two opposing ideas without taking a side or expressing any argument.


Passage number 58.
 MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd just like to ask one question about the monetary policy assumption. Up until the fourth quarter of 1978, money grew on average about 8 percent. You have an assumption of 6-1/4 percent, adjusting for ATS. Does that also include any adjustment for the 2 percent shift in the demand for money. M R .  KICHLINE. Yes, it does. It's consistent with the Bluebook; in effect, you add 2 percent to the 6-1/4 percent. A s  you know, in the fourth quarter--and apparently in the current quarter, the way things are shaping up--the money demand function has begun to 2/6/79 -7- differ from actual experience. We're picking up some of the drift that Steve Axilrod had assumed a year ago. It didn't show up for 3 quarters, but we held on to that assumption and it eventually showed up. So we do add 2 percent to the 6-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is asking for clarification on whether the monetary policy assumption includes an adjustment for the 2 percent shift in the demand for money, and the response confirms that it does.


Passage number 59.
 MR. AXILROD. It's not quite believeable, but we did assume 6 months ago, even 9 months ago, that we would begin to get this drift around the fourth quarter of 1978. It has begun to develop; whether it will continue or not we can't be certain, but we had assumed it and we have continued to assume it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a belief or assumption made by Mr. Axilrod and acknowledges the uncertainty of whether it will continue or not.


Passage number 60.
 MR. WILLES. When you say add 2 percent, what I'm trying to figure out is what measured M1 growth will be consistent with this. We can take 3 percent off for ATS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Willes is simply seeking clarification and trying to determine the impact of adding 2 percent and subtracting 3 percent on measured M1 growth.


Passage number 61.
 MR. AXILROD. Right, about 3-1/4 percent. That's all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod simply states a percentage without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 62.
 MR. WILLES. That's all. Now, what about the shift in demand for NOWS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks for information about the shift in demand for NOWS.


Passage number 63.
 MR. AXILROD. Well, if we don't get that 2 percent shift, then at the level of interest rates assumed the actual growth will turn out to be 5-1/4 percent if we're right about the ATS [effect].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 64.
 MR. KICHLINE. Another way of viewing it, in terms of what you're suggesting, is that the observed 3-1/4 percent rate of growth in money in pre-1974 days has the power of 5-1/4 percent money because of the effect of [the shift].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kichline is simply offering an alternative perspective on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 65.
 MR. PARTEE. That's how they get rates as low as they did. If we didn't have that shift in demand for money, interest rates would be higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about how the shift in demand for money helped to lower interest rates.


Passage number 66.
 MR. WILLES. And another way of saying it is that if measured money adjusting for ATS is 6-1/4 percent, without the shift it's really 8-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 67.
 MR. AXILROD. For this level of interest rates, if we don't get the shift we'd have 8-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact.


Passage number 68.
 MR. WILLES. For this level of interest rates--which in effect means if that shift takes place, then there'd be no change in monetary policy in terms of M1 from the past two years on your assumption for the forecast period. Right. If that shift takes place, then you're not assuming any additional restriction in monetary policy from what we have had over the last two years. M R .  KICHLINE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Willes and Mr. Kichline agree that if a certain shift in interest rates occurs, there will be no change in monetary policy.


Passage number 69.
 MR. AXILROD. I think that's correct. The only caveat that I would note is that this isn't a new assumption. We have essentially been assuming that this shift would take place at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the previous statement and adds a small clarification.


Passage number 70.
 MR. WILLES. It wasn't taking place last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is an assertion of a fact and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 71.
 MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Axilrod agrees with something, without any opposing viewpoints or arguments being mentioned.


Passage number 72.
 MR. WILLES. And we got 8 percent growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage includes a statement of fact without any sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 73.
 2/6/79 -8- MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that simply confirms the accuracy of a previous statement or question.


Passage number 74.
 MR. WILLES. If we get 6 percent growth plus the 2 percent, then we're essentially where we were in '78 and most of '77. SPEAKER(.). That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Willes and the speaker agree on the fact that if they achieve 6 percent growth plus the 2 percent, they would be essentially at the same level as in '78 and most of '77.


Passage number 75.
 MR. WILLES. All right, thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude for something, indicating a polite interaction without any apparent disagreement.


Passage number 76.
 MR. MAYO. Except that we're substituting some velocity for some money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that they are substituting velocity for money supply, without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 77.
 MR. AXILROD(.). Yes. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that Mr. Axilrod agrees with a previous statement or argument.


Passage number 78.
 MR. COLDWELL. That's what we've been doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states the action that has been taken without expressing any differing opinions or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 79.
 MR. MAYO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any specific information or statements about MR. MAYO that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 80.
 So the published figures are going to come out-- MR. PARTEE. 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the published figures are going to be released at a rate of 3 percent.


Passage number 81.
 MR. MAYO. Yes, that's right. In other words, we're sticking our necks out a little on some velocity estimates. We need to pay a little more attention to them this time, if we read the Bluebook literally, than we have before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they need to focus more on velocity estimates, based on the Bluebook's instructions.


Passage number 82.
 MR. AXILROD. That's one way of putting it. It's the other side of the demand for money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod, giving an alternative perspective on the topic of money demand.


Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let us proceed then to ask Steve Axilrod to give his comments and recommendations on the longer-run ranges. Then we'll go around and have each of you give us your input on how you see the economy and the policy implications in tenns of how you see the long-run ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a procedure that will be followed in order to gather comments and recommendations on the longer-run ranges from Steve Axilrod and the rest of the individuals.


Passage number 84.
 MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 85.
] CHAIRMAN MILLER. [What about] bank credit, Steve. M R .  AXILROD. Well, I think I would stay with the alternative B range, which is 1 percentage point lower than what we now have; that would seem to me quite consistent with the slowing in growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Steve and Mr. Axilrod are discussing bank credit and potential alternative options. While they may have different opinions on the appropriate range for bank credit, there is no clear contention or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 86.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I would just like to remind everyone--as you know since we've talked about the Humphrey-Hawkins legislation and Steve mentioned this--that what we're really talking about involves one important difference in setting long-term ranges. And that is that we will not in this calendar year have new ranges based upon new base periods. we are now going to operate for the whole year on a fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter basis. So these ranges will not have the famous Henry Wallich base drift that has allowed us to go with the times. We will have [the opportunity for] a mid-course correction; in July we're supposed to report on any changes we think appropriate for the ranges for this year. That does not mean updating the base to the second quarter or [adopting a range] for the third quarter of '79 to the third quarter of '80. It means relooking at the ranges set for the fourth quarter of '78 to the fourth quarter of '79. And we'll be asked to give at that time the first indications of our policy 2 / 6 / 7 9  -9- objectives for the calendar year 1980. So that's an important difference. Specifically, in our report, which the Board of Governors will file in time for us to testify on the 20th of February, we'll need to report on "the objectives and plans of the FOMC with respect to the ranges of growth or diminution in the monetary and credit aggregates for this calendar year, taking account of past and prospective developments in employment, unemployment, production, investment, real income, productivity, international trade and payments, and prices." these objectives to the short-term goals set forth in the President's Economic Report. So this is what we're going to be doing. We also need to provide the relationship of what I think might be most helpful, having had Steve's recommendation, is to go around the table and have each of you make any comments you wish about the economic outlook and your views on how that should be translated into these ranges. Then we'll be able to see if we can synthesize some decision from that. I think last time we started in this direction [around the table] so this time why don't we start the other way. M R .  ROOS. May I ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the process for setting long-term ranges and seeking input from others.


Passage number 87.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 88.
 MR. ROOS. Excuse me. Obviously, we're all very much interested in the recent behavior of the aggregates, and I was very much impressed with Steve's eloquence in describing what he considers to be some of the reasons for that behavior. But I don't have the intellectual capacity, Steve, to absorb all this as you say it. Would it be proper procedure to ask Steve to send me at least, and anybody else who wants it, the first part of your report in writing. [I would like to see in writing] your rationalization for why this behavior is occurring because it would be helpful to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their inability to fully comprehend the information and requests a written report to better understand the rationalization for the recent behavior of the aggregates.


Passage number 89.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Too bad we didn't have a tape recorder on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement expressing regret that a tape recorder was not available. There is no contention or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 90.
 MR. ROOS. [Unintelligible] if that's how it works.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by MR. ROOS is unintelligible, so it does not convey any clear argument or disagreement.


Passage number 91.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Actually, I think we did have the tape recorder on. Certainly we can have it transcribed and sent to you. That's no problem at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the tape recorder was on and offers to have the recorded conversation transcribed and sent out.


Passage number 92.
 MR. ROOS. Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 93.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I forgot that there's no green light [in front of me, as there is at Board meetings, to indicate that the tape recorder is on]. But we have the recorder on without a green light at the FOMC meetings. So, we'll start with Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This passage is simply stating a fact about the absence of a green light on the tape recorder at certain meetings.


Passage number 94.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, so far as the economy is concerned, I have been interested in whether the higher numbers of the fourth quarter are being carried over into a mood of more business buoyancy than we have had in recent months. I have contacted [several people in] the business community recently and they suggest that that is the case. I don't know whether that's just a lagging indicator or whether it's significant. One has the feeling that, without doing 2 / 6 / 1 9  -10- anything very dramatic, people may be reaffirming their capital spending intentions anyway and that there's a little less certainty in people's minds that we're going to have a recession. I continue to feel that we could have a recession, but it's by no means certain. I wouldn't rule one out, by any means, in the second half of the year. But in terms of the recession outlook itself, I think the number one problem continues to be the concern about the price level. greatest risk to the economy, as well as [to actual] inflation, is people having the feeling that prices are getting out of control. I think the tenor of our policy should still be in the direction of reinforcing and building on the degree of credibility that has been gained in recent months, both in the Administration and in the Federal Reserve. That should be our first priority. I don't think we can do much about the uncertainty on the business side by a gesture toward easing policy at this point; I think that would be a mistake. It would probably increase the risks of recession. The When I look at these long-term ranges, let me say that there is one influence on the aggregates recently that hasn't been mentioned and that people at my Bank think might be quite important. And that is the increase in Federal Reserve float; it has been quite sharp and unprecedented. Whether it has had an influence or not depends upon how corporations in particular look upon their bank balances and whether they're operating in effect off their own check book or off the amount of money the bank tells them they have in the bank. If it is the latter--and I'm sure that's true of a lot of corporations--the increase in float has the perverse effect of pushing down the reported money supply in a way that isn't real.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a combination of the speaker's observations and opinions about the state of the economy.


Passage number 95.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, the recipient of the check has less, according to the bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact that the recipient of the check has less money according to the bank.


Passage number 96.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The recipient couldn't have less. He has the same as he would otherwise have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply stating that the recipient has the same amount as he would have had otherwise. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 97.
 He cashes the check but-- MR. COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 98.
 But the Federal Reserve-- VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fellow who writes the check has more and he spends the money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it simply states a fact about the Federal Reserve's role in spending money.


Passage number 99.
 MR. COLDWELL. The Federal Reserve grants the credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Coldwell about the Federal Reserve granting credit is simply a statement of fact without any opposing views or debate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 100.
 MR. PARTEE. That's assuming that the bank gives credit for funds not received.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. In this context, Mr. Partee assumes that the bank gives credit for funds not received, which suggests a disagreement with the previously mentioned idea or assumption.


Passage number 101.
 MR. COLDWELL. They do that. M R .  PARTEE. They certainly don't give me credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Coldwell acknowledges that "they" (presumably referring to someone or something else) does something, and Mr. Partee agrees by expressing that he does not receive credit. There is no clear indication of disagreement or contention between them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 102.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But they do to big corporations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that individuals may not matter to big corporations, implying a disagreement or contention between the interests of individuals and those of big corporations.


Passage number 103.
 MR. AXILROD. President Volcker, we've looked into that with your staff. There may be a lot of biases in the money supply. To get a measured bias from what you're talking about, it appears that it has to be transferred between two zero balance corporate accounts. So we don't believe the effect would be very large.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply presents information regarding the biases in the money supply and the potential effect on zero balance corporate accounts.


Passage number 104.
 2 / 6 / 1 9  -11- VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my staff pretty well convinced me that it goes in this direction. Nobody knows, but the change in float has been so big that I think it might have had an [effect]. We'll see when float goes down what it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and acknowledging that nobody knows the exact cause of the change in float. The statement is more speculative than argumentative.


Passage number 105.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I assume we're going to get float down, aren' t we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making an assumption and seeking confirmation or agreement from the person they are speaking to.


Passage number 106.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then we'll have the reverse effect if this explanation is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a potential outcome if the given explanation is correct.


Passage number 107.
 MR. PARTEE. I hope you're right because it certainly would help to explain January if you are right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing agreement or support for the speaker's statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In any event, this makes it particularly difficult. We've had this big increase in money market funds along the lines of a change in appraisals of cash balances versus other media. But, in looking at numbers for the long-term aggregates, I come up with ranges for M2 and M3 about like those in alternative A, but the M1 range in "A" looks too high to me. Just adding the 3 percent for ATS produces an upper limit that seems much too high to me. I would suggest something like 1 to 4 percent for M1. So, these numbers that I'm suggesting are about 1 percentage point lower than what Mr. Axilrod just suggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker disagrees with Mr. Axilrod's suggested numbers for M1, suggesting that they are too high.


Passage number 109.
 MS. TEETERS. It sounds like alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that it sounds like alternative B.


Passage number 110.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's more like "B" for M1, but I would go along with "A" for M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing different opinions or preferences about different options (A and B) for M1, M2, and M3.


Passage number 111.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Paul. Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply expressing gratitude towards Paul. There is no sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 112.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, we're going to have to address a number of issues and make a number of linkages to get to these long-range aggregates. The first is the question of the correctness of the staff's economic projection. I can't say that I see anything much wrong with it except that I was reminded of Governor Shepardson's comment one time many years ago after a chart show like this. There is a tendency, which I noticed throughout your charts, for the dotted lines on the right hand side of the charts, [representing your projection], to be a lot more stable than the solid lines on the left side [depicting actual data for the past]. And I wonder why that is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply pointing out an observation about the charts and expressing curiosity about it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, I think the staff can guarantee that their dotted lines will not be achieved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker believes that the staff cannot guarantee achieving their dotted lines, implying a lack of confidence in their capabilities.


Passage number 114.
 MR. PARTEE. In a way, that's the problem here. Because although I understand why the dotted lines are fairly straight, the line for the rate of growth in the real economy is straight at an extraordinarily low level. That is, for 6 quarters running the line shows an increase in real GNP of around 1-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not demonstrating any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing his understanding of the situation and acknowledging a problem with the rate of growth in the real economy.


Passage number 115.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Plus or minus 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given phrase "plus or minus 3 percent." It is a commonly used expression to indicate a margin of error or uncertainty in numerical values.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 116.
 MR. PARTEE. And the staff has 6 quarters of industrial production increases of 1-1/2 percent or thereabouts. Similarly, for consumption and investment and business inventories, the [growth] rate numbers are all very stable and really quite moderate. The question I 2 / 6 / 7 9  -12- suppose a business cycle economist would have to ask is whether we can have 6 quarters of such low growth without something happening--either [the economy1 tipping into recession because of a lack of momentum or something coming, say, from the international area in military preparedness [spending] or something like that which would in some way speed up the [expansion] process. I have to say that I’m inclined to think that we’ll tip into recession during this period. But even if we do [not] tip into recession, there is a second problem as I see it. And that is that if the staff forecast is correct--and I still think it’s on the optimistic side rather than the pessimistic side from the standpoint of real activity--it is below the Administration’s goals, particularly for 1980, and we do have to associate what we’re doing with the short-run goals of the Administration. I looked it up, Nancy, and it is clearly two years. M S .  TEETERS. At this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses his belief that the economy will tip into recession during the period discussed. However, he acknowledges that even if a recession is avoided, there is still a problem with the staff forecast being below the Administration's goals. This suggests a difference of opinion or viewpoint on the state of the economy and the potential outcomes.


Passage number 117.
 MR. PARTEE. Yes, at this time we have to say what the relationship of our policy for the next year is to the 2-year short- run goals [of the Administration].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have to define the relationship between their policy and the short-run goals of the administration.


Passage number 118.
 MS. TEETERS. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information about the content to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 119.
] MR. PARTEE. No. It’s clear if you read the language of the Act, as I did yesterday afternoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 120.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, Chuck, I think that’s another issue. I have the language right here and we are to give our objectives onl\l for 1979.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and referencing the language they have in order to support their point.


Passage number 121.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or specific information about Mr. Partee.


Passage number 122.
 We are to give our monetary objectives-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. And we’re to say what the relationship is to the [Administration‘s] short-term goals--the relationship for 1980 would be my guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker seems to be unsure about the exact relationship between monetary objectives and the Administration's short-term goals for 1980, but there is no disagreement.


Passage number 123.
 MR. PARTEE. But you see, maybe this [requirement] was somewhat deliberate on the presumption that monetary policy has a leading effect on the economy. If you look at this [forecast], you see that although we‘re not far [from the Administration] for 1979 on the real and the nominal, in 1980 we depart quite a bit further. And the reason for that is that in the second half of 1979 when the Administration goal shows a recovery in housing we don‘t have one. It’s one of the biggest single differences. Therefore, I’m inclined to think that unless policy does something on the real side, we‘re going to run short of the stated goals of the Administration. Now, it could be argued--and perhaps this is the best thing to do--that we‘re also going to miss their goals on the inflation side because it certainly seems improbable that the rate of inflation will decline to the extent that they have in their projections. But one of the developments that takes place when we’re talking as we are about such a very low rate of increase in the economy is a rise in the unemployment rate. And that gets the unemployment rate to a fairly significant level--over 7 percent in the staff projection--by the end of the forecast period. In my view it will get to 7 percent by the end of this year, not next year. I think the economy is that much weaker. So we do have that problem. 2/6/79 -13- Now, with ATS and velocity and shifts in the demand schedule and all that, we can probably assert that almost anything we put down is consistent with the objectives of Humphrey-Hawkins and indeed it may be because the range of variation and experience on, say, the demand schedule alone is larger than the kinds of variations that we talk about in the growth of the aggregates. But we do have this additional problem, as You said in the beginning, Mr.Chairman, that we’re going to have to stick with these ranges throughout the year. And, therefore, they will become a little more binding than before. I think 2 to 5 percent or even 2 to 4-112 percent on M1 is okay, but we ought to say we’re assuming that ATS and NOW accounts will continue to come in at something like their recent rate, which has had an effect of about 3 percentage points on the observed growth rate in M1. Then, if that changes, which in my opinion it might well do, we will be able to say it has changed and therefore the recorded numbers have changed. But on M2 and M3, I‘m inclined to want somewhat higher growth ranges than might otherwise be indicated by the present situation because I think it will be very difficult to say we‘re going to have substantially lower growth in M2 and M3 as well as M1 in this period to come. So I would take the risk of having a wider range, even though it might result in some criticism from the Congress. I would pick the numbers that Steve last mentioned--5-1/2 to 8-112 percent for M2, believing myself that it’s more likely to be 5-112 than 8-112, and 6-112 to 9-112 percent for M3, believing that it’s likely to be 6-112. And, as I say, I’d choose 2 to 4-112 percent or something on that order for M1. I think we stand a fair chance of being able to live within those ranges as the year goes on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 124.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply shows gratitude from one person, Chuck, to another, Nancy.


Passage number 125.
 MS. TEETERS. Well, I have the same problem with the staff forecast. The economy is either going to recover or we‘re going to have a recession. I think the probabilities are on the side of a recession, but I don’t see it occurring until the end of this year and the early part of next year. Part of the reason that we deviate from the Administration’s forecast for 1980 has to do with the statement in the very opening paragraphs [of Part 1 of the Greenbook] where it says “and we assume that interest rates will not be changed over the forecast period.” I know that the Administration has forecast, for the first time on record, a decline in interest rates over the coming two years. So in a way they’ve really put the monkey on our backs. If we relax interest rates we get better results; we get closer to the Administration‘s projections though we don’t make it completely. There’s no combination that we’ve looked at that resulted in a complete reconciliation of the inflation and unemployment goals of the Administration. On the other hand, it seems to me that the unemployment rates [in the staff’s forecast] are going to be politically unacceptable. If we force them up, the Congress will force upon us an extremely [expansionary] fiscal policy, which I really don’t think we need at this point. As a result, I guess I’m more willing to ease a little on interest rates and let the money supply grow. If you look at Appendix I of the Bluebook, the funds rate associated with alternative B rises from the current 10 percent to 10-314 percent; in alternative [C] it goes from the current 10 percent to 11-3/8 percent. I don’t think we need that. In the current situation, with the continuing strength that’s carrying forward in the beginning part of this year, I don‘t 2 / 6 / 1 9  -14- think we need rising interest rates. On the other hand, I‘m not at all convinced that we should lower interest rates. So, I would go for a policy that would keep the funds rate at about 10 percent, knowing that in [July]. when the FOMC meets again on Humphrey-Hawkins, we can change the ranges. We can’t change the base, but we can change the ranges in the middle of the year. And we‘ll have a lot better idea about where we‘re going by midyear. That is always true; the world is always clearer six months down the line. So I would opt for 2 to 5 percent for M1, 6 to 8-1/2 or maybe 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for M2, and 7 to 9-1/2 or 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M3, with the idea that we will keep the federal funds rate at or slightly below 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the speaker expressing their thoughts and opinions on the economy and monetary policy.


Passage number 126.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy. Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply shows gratitude and acknowledgment from one person to another.


Passage number 127.
 MR. BLACK. Our assessment of the economy pretty much parallels what I think Paul Volcker was saying. We come out with about the same growth in real GNP as the Board staff but we feel that the inflation rate is going to be above the staff’s estimate. We expect the rate for the full year to run somewhere around 8-1/2 to 9 percent. So far as the economy for the year is concerned, I have a lot of sympathy with the views expressed by both Chuck and Nancy. I can’t view with equanimity even the lower inflation rate that is forecast by the staff because with that kind of rate it seems to me that the economy is bound to develop excesses either domestically or internationally that might well tip it downward. But for the time being I come back to Paul’s original statement that inflation is the main problem at the moment. So we would advocate the same policy that we‘ve been suggesting for the last several meetings of a gradual deceleration in the rate of growth in the aggregates. We have couched this more in terms of M1 and would suggest edging the growth of M1 down in the four quarters ending in each quarter of the year. And for the fourth quarter of last year we had hoped M1 growth would be down to 7 - l / 2  percent before adjusting for ATS accounts and about 7.2 percent after. As luck would have it, we ended up almost exactly at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement with Paul Volcker and the Board staff's assessment of the economy, but states that they have a higher estimate for inflation. They also express agreement with the views expressed by Chuck and Nancy, but ultimately advocate for a gradual deceleration in the rate of growth in the aggregates, which aligns with their previous suggestions.


Passage number 128.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Good planning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement evident in the phrase "Good planning" itself. It is a neutral statement that does not express any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 129.
 MR. BLACK. Well, an accident really. But we would now suggest that for the fourth quarter of ‘78 to the fourth quarter of ‘ 7 9 ,  we ought to be thinking in terms of 6 percent [Ml growth1 before ATS. Of course, the question of what we really want depends on the estimate of what ATS accounts will do. We think the staff is about right with its estimate of a 3 to 3-1/2 percent [effect on that growth] rate, so we would favor about a 3 percent midpoint [in the range] for growth in Ml. This leads us to favor the range under alternative B of 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent. We have a lot more trouble with M2 because there is so much uncertainty surrounding it, as has been mentioned by several people. The growth in money market funds may be the main factor at work here, but we have [uncertainties regarding] unit trust accounts, CDs, Eurodollars, money market CDs [at] S&Ls, and Treasury bills. All these things make this very difficult to figure out. But we think M2 clearly ought to come down and we can’t think of anything better than what the staff has put down, so we would buy the 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent M2 range in “B.” We would also buy the staff’s “B“ ranges on M3 and bank credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their perspective and thoughts on different growth rates for M1, M2, M3, and bank credit, but they do not express any disagreement with the staff's estimates or ranges.


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Walter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply includes a statement of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 131.
 2 / 6 / 7 9  -15- MR. MACDONALD. Following in Bob's vein, let me say that business activity is relatively strong in our District. Many businessmen, however, are apprehensive about [the economy] later in the year. People are especially concerned about the consumer being over-extended in the housing market. The strengths in our District include steel and machine tools, but inflation continues to be the overriding source of concern for everybody from the consumer to the manufacturer. Among the unknowns are energy, the Iranian situation, and wage settlements coming up this year. For these reasons I would not suggest easing policy; I'd wait until we can better judge the economy and the slowdown in the Ms. I agree with President Volcker on a 1 to 4 percent M1 range and a 4 to I percent M2 range, and [then] following alternative B in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they would not suggest easing policy, while President Volcker has a different stance.


Passage number 132.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Walter. Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not include any statement or argument that could lead to contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 133.
 MR. EASTBURN. Well, Chuck has expressed my views about the projections--the lowness and the smoothness of the dotted lines--very well and I won't repeat that. I would say, however, that the often [repeated] statement that we have no imbalances in the economy overlooks the fact that we have an 8 to 10 percent inflation rate, and I think that's a severe imbalance. I suspect we'll have a recession toward the end of the year. A s  far as the long-run ranges are concerned, I think we need to give evidence that we are proceeding on a course of systematically cutting back our ranges to deal with inflation over a longer-term period, yet not cutting them back so drastically as to precipitate a recession. That's because I think that a recession could be in the long run the most inflationary thing we could do. I have no strong feelings about the specific numbers that have been cited. But I like Steve's alternate suggestion on M2 and M3 much better than alternative B. Because there is such great uncertainty about what's really going on and what's going to happen to the demand for money, I'd be inclined to be on the upper side. One way to handle this would be simply to knock 112 percentage point off our current ranges as an indication of proceeding on a systematic course of getting [the ranges down]. That would come close to what Steve has suggested with the expection of M1, which would then be 1-112 to 5-1/2 percent. I think that might be a good middle position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Eastburn is expressing his views and opinions, but there is no indication of disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 134.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Dave. Kyle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of thanks.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 135.
 MR. FOSSUM. We certainly see no signs of impending recession in the Sixth District, and this view is supported by almost all of our directors at our head office and branches who seem by and large to feel that their own areas of business are apt to fare better than the national economy. This attitude is particularly prevalent in Florida which, unlike the situation in '73 and '74. has seen little or no speculation or overbuilding. however, in that our projections on the economic outlook are somewhat less optimistic than the Greenbook's. We expect real growth more in the 1 to 1-1/2 percent range and we think 6-1/2 to 6-3/4 percent on unemployment seems more likely. But our chief disagreement would be on the inflation outlook where we see it somewhat worse than the Board's staff; we estimate that it will probably be in the 8-112 to 9 percent range. I would add our voice to Bob Mayo's, 2/6/19 -16- As for the long-term ranges, for M1 we would be inclined to go with the 1 to 4 percent that Paul Volcker and others have suggested. But we'd be inclined to support the ranges in alternative C for the other aggregates; those somewhat higher ranges I think would be consistent with our appraisal of the outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that their projections on the economic outlook are less optimistic than the Greenbook's and they also disagree with the Board's staff on the inflation outlook.


Passage number 136.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Alternative C for M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement simply suggests an alternative option for M2 and M3.


Passage number 137.
 MR. FOSSUM. Yes, for M2, M3, and bank credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that for M2, M3, and bank credit, the answer is yes.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Kyle. Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude towards Kyle.


Passage number 139.
 MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, we just concluded a series of meetings with the chief executive officers of major industrial companies in our area and, as many others have said, we saw practically no evidence of anything but a strong economy. They were almost unanimous in that point of view. However, while the economy is strong, at least in our part of the world, we do have some concern about the abruptness and extent of the decline in the basic money supply over the past three months. Our concern arises from a belief that if the money supply were to be reduced abruptly for several quarters from an 8 percent rate to a 4 percent rate or less--those rates being for the old M1--we would indeed have a recession. We also feel, of course, that through monetary policy we are capable of guiding the extent of the decline in the money supply. The recent decline could be attributed to what Peter pointed out, that we have been sellers of a significant amount of dollars--$5 billion plus--out of our portfolio as a means, I would assume, of pegging our fed funds rate at a rate of 10 percent or slightly above. What I am driving at is that, although the jury is still out, I think we should very carefully watch these money trends in the next two to three months. I really am more concerned right now with the fact that if we set the lower level for the M1 range at something like 1 percent and add 3 percentage points to it [for the ATS effect], in round figures we could be reducing the rate of money growth rather quickly from 8 percent to 4 percent. And I think that could precipitate the type of recession that all of us would like to avoid. So specifically, I would suggest a narrowing of the M1 range to perhaps 2-112 to 4 percent. I would very strongly urge that we permit the fed funds rate to drift down, if necessary, in order to attain the growth in the aggregates that we prescribe. To do that I would welcome, and in fact would recommend, a widening of the fed funds rate range. I wouldn't even be concerned--although you will probably feel this is a radical point of view--about a fed funds target of something like 9 to 10-1/2 percent and a narrowing of our attention to the aggregates, with specific concern on the lower parts of the ranges for those aggregates. As far as M2 and M3 are concerned, I could live with the alternative A specifications proposed by the staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It primarily presents the speaker's views, concerns, and recommendations regarding the economy and monetary policy.


Passage number 140.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Larry. We'll hop across the table to Roger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude towards Larry and then indicating that they will move across the table to Roger.


Passage number 141.
 MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to 1919, we agree rather closely with the staff's projections, except that we think the first quarter may not be quite as strong as suggested by the staff. But f o r  the year as a whole we are fairly close--perhaps a bit 2/6/79 -17- more pessimistic but in a range that probably doesn't make much difference. In meetings with businessmen and others in our part of the country, the sentiment is fairly strong that we will escape a recession in 1979--that these straight lines projected by the dots might really come true. Philosophically they believe that there is a little better chance that that will be the case [than not]. With regard to the aggregates, I noticed that Steve mentioned the possibility of some political problem with widening the ranges from what he put into the Bluebook. But he ended up with a range of 3 percentage points range rather than 4; he went from a range of [2 to 61 percent to a range of 2 to 5 percent. But there are a lot of uncertainties about M1 specifically that have been mentioned around the table. One, for example, is the shift in demand for money; that might amount to 2 percent. Another relates to the effect of ATS accounts, about which we know very little--we are 3 months into this-- and the projection is that it could be as much as 3 percent. Given these uncertainties, it seems to me that even under the new Humphrey- Hawkins bill there would be some advantage to having an M1 range a bit wider than 3 percentage points; perhaps we should maintain the 4 percentage point width that we went with in October because of uncertainty. So, I would like to see the width of the M1 range at 4 percentage points, with a range of 1 to 5 percent. Hopefully, as we get more experience with ATS accounts we can narrow it a bit. But I don't see that there will be a great deal of criticism in maintaining that 4 percentage point span for M1. With respect to M2 and M3, I would agree with those around the table who would like to see the numbers increased a bit from those in alternative B of the Bluebook, again because of various uncertainties. A s  a result, I'd have an M2 range of 5 to 8 percent, which again is a 3-point band, and an M3 range of 6 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the staff's projections and suggesting slight modifications to the ranges based on uncertainties. The lack of criticism mentioned also suggests a general consensus.


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Roger. My list says "Boy" Mayo, but I think it's supposed to be Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement where the speaker acknowledges a potential error in their list.


Passage number 143.
 MR. MAYO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As one of the elder people around the table, I do indeed thank you. First, my answer to Chuck on the Shepardson phenomenon is that this merely indicates again that people on the staff are more comfortable with actuals than they are with estimates, and my solution is to make the solid lines straighter instead of putting more jiggles in the dotted lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Mayo, is expressing his gratitude to the chairman and providing his perspective on the Shepardson phenomenon. He suggests a solution to address the staff's preference for actuals over estimates.


Passage number 144.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. A little seasonal adjusting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "a little seasonal adjusting" is neutral and does not indicate any conflicting views.


Passage number 145.
 MR. MAYO. Right. I find that this phenomenon is typical of a lot of businessmen, too. That is, they say: Well, we might have a recession, but I don't see it in my business; I'm not going to have one. And by gum you can go back to 1973 and 1974 and they were saying exactly the same thing. So they have a dotted line problem as well; it isn't just us economists. I have one question and one observation before we get to the figures. The question, Steve, relates to the assumption of a 3 percentage point adjustment for ATS accounts--and I assume New York 2/6/19 -18- NOWs--throughout 1979. What is your feel on this. I would have come to the conclusion independently, without doing any real work on it, that this would be a declining percentage during 1979 and that by the end of the year it might only be 1 or 1-1/2 percent. But I don’t know what I am talking about; it’s just a feel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a statement by Mr. Mayo about a common phenomenon among businessmen and then a question and observation from him. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 146.
 MR. AXILROD. We have it declining in 1980. At the end of 1979 ATS accounts in total are, on our assumption, around [$26] billion. If half of that comes out of demand deposits that’s about $13 billion. The total amount of deposits that are eligible about that time is $100 billion. So it’s fairly modest if you look at it that way. It‘s a little more than 12 percent of the total that can be transferred. So I don’t feel too bad about it as an estimate. In part, the reason I recommended 2 to 5 percent as a possibility to consider is that my instinct is a bit like yours. It may be wrong, but my instinct is that in the 3 to 3-1/2 percent area it’s more likely to be 3 percent or a perhaps shade under.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Axilrod explaining his reasoning and estimates.


Passage number 147.
 MR. MAYO. That’s all it could be at this time, that‘s true. My other point is an observation on the President‘s Economic Report. It’s terribly obvious, at least to me, that the Council was trying very hard to come up with figures that somehow will tie in with the Humphrey-Hawkins goals down the line and has concluded that it is impossible. This is more evident, obviously, in ’81 and ’82 than it is in their look at ‘79 and ‘80. But to me that explains why we are a little more pessimistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses personal observations and opinions but does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 148.
 MR. PARTEE. I think, Bob, that ‘79 and ‘80 are legitimate projections and the next three years are nothing but a straight line [extension]. M R .  MAYO. Well, that’s true. But even in ‘80 I think one of the main reasons we are more pessimistic than the Council relates to their attempt to have a dotted line again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Partee and Mr. Mayo agree that the next three years are a straight line projection and that the Council's attempt to have a dotted line (indicating uncertainty or potential changes) is a reason for being more pessimistic.


Passage number 149.
 MR. PARTEE. They’re aware that it’s an election year also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement suggests that both parties are aware that it is an election year. There is no indication of contention or disagreement between them.


Passage number 150.
 MR. MAYO. I have heard about that, yes. My second observation on the Council report, which hasn’t been mentioned here, is that there is a [notable] lack of discussion in the report of the whole capital investment problem, and investment is one of the items in Humphrey-Hawkins that gets a pretty high priority as I read the Act. I sympathize with the Council‘s inability to figure out what can be done to achieve a proper level of investment and productivity, but they really haven’t come up with anything. ~ To turn to the issue of the moment, I have no real objections to Steve’s prescription for M1 of a 2 to 5 percent range. I originally thought we could perhaps get away with 2 to 4 percent, but I think narrowing the range by 1 percentage point is about all the discipline we should enforce on ourselves with the lesser flexibility in our goal-setting procedure than has been the case under the joint resolution. So, 2 to 5 percent is all right with me. I feel a little differently than Steve does, though, on M2 and M3. I think once we deviate from the range we might just as well not be timid about it. I’d deviate a little more and not just by 1/2 percentage point as he suggested. So, I would go to 5 to 8 percent on M2 and 6 to 9 percent on M3. The importance of the analysis in the eyes of the public, in 2/6/79 -19- the eyes of the market, and in the eyes of the Congressmen is perhaps a 10 to 1 on emphasis on M1; that's the critical measure. They will accept our reasoning more logically on M2 and M3 if indeed [the ranges] do turn out that [way]; some would criticize us for, in effect, undermining the housing market and so forth by goals that were too low on M2 or M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 151.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 152.
 Mark MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I won't quibble with the staff's forecast. I would simply point out that we think they have done an incredibly good job on a horrendously difficult task. In terms of the probabilities, there is the possibility that the economy could be stronger as well as weaker. If businessmen really were convinced that we were doing something about inflation, then those business numbers could come in significantly stronger. That's what we keep hearing in some of our Districts at least. They are telling us that's a possibility. with regard to policy, I have been fascinated by the discussion today. Humphrey-Hawkins presents both a major dilemma and a major opportunity, it seems to me. I feel very shaky about simulating econometric models out into 1980. In fact, [at our Bank] we happen to feel shaky about simulating them period. We are not sure they work. But, clearly--and I think the staff would agree--they work less well for 1980 than they do for 1979. On the other hand, given our view of the world, if we were to announce and then follow through on a credible policy, our feeling is that we can have a very salutary impact on what happens in 1980. Without boring you with all the gory details, our theory would tell us that we can in fact have less inflation without more unemployment in 1980 if we have policies in 1979 that are consistent with that [objective]--policies that are firmly held to so that people really believe we are going to follow through on them. That suggests to me that while the staff's forecast for 1980 shows relatively little [improvement] on price performance and rising unemployment--and I think that may well be the case--we have the possibility in 1979 to lay the groundwork for a much better performance on prices. slack in the economy but on the way people operate given what they think is going to happen with government policy on inflation. That better performance would not depend on In our view, then, that makes what we do with the long-run ranges this time absolutely critical because this is when we announce them to the world and then have to deliver on them. Ignoring the politics for a minute--1 know I play these numbers games and somehow they seem very important to me and maybe not so important to other people--let's look at the range that Steve gave for M1, which was 2 to 5 percent. If you take the 5 percent, add 3 percentage points for ATS and 2 percentage points for a downward shift in the demand for money, that's a potential maximum growth of 10 percent. If you take the midpoint of 3-1/2 percent [in Steve's range], which presumably would be our target, and add those 5 percentage points for the same reasons, that would give us an 8-1/2 percent target for 1979. That's exactly [the growth] we had in '77 and '78, and I think that was too expansionary. average at around 8 percent. So I, for one, would feel very uncomfortable with a target of 3-1/2 percent. If we just follow through the logic for a minute without thinking of the politics, which We got too much inflation by allowing money to grow on 2/6/79 -20- I am not equipped to do, a desirable range for M1 would be something like 0 to 3 percent. That would give us a midpoint of 1-1/2 percent; and if the assumptions on ATS and the shift in the demand for money are right, then we get 6-1/2 percent growth at the midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the staff's forecast and presenting their own ideas and theories. They mention the possibility of a stronger economy if business numbers improve and discuss their view on the effectiveness of econometric models. They also discuss the potential impact of announcing and following through on credible policies and the importance of long-term ranges. There is no direct disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 153.
 MR. PARTEE. What if they are wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply posing a hypothetical question.


Passage number 154.
 MR. WILLES. Well, I'm getting to that. If they are wrong-- if all we get is ATS, for example, and not the downward shift in the demand for money--we then move up to the top part of the range which would be 3 percent plus the ATS, which is again 6-1/2 percent. If there is a greater shift in the demand for money then, of course, it would go the other way. We are all guessing at this point but there seems to be the possibility that the shift could be greater as well as smaller. So it seems to me that if we want to change policy--and maybe we don't--from the 8 percent growth we have had, then we have to move the M1 range down to something below what anybody to this point has suggested. I would suggest that the range be 0 to 3 percent which in my mind says, given the most likely set of assumptions, that we would really be going from 8 percent to 6-1/2 percent under the old rule. For M2, whatever you all decide is fine with me; I can't understand M2 or M3 or any of the other aggregates, with due apologies to my friends from San Francisco.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and suggesting a range for the M1 growth rate. They also mention that they cannot understand other aggregates like M2 or M3, but this is not a point of contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 155.
 MR. PARTEE. But you do understand M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The disagreement occurs when the speaker says "But you do understand M1," suggesting that there is a difference in understanding between the two parties involved.


Passage number 156.
 MR. WILLES. Well, with a rather wide range of uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or statement without any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 157.
 MR. BALLES. I'll just send you that M2 [study], Mark. Maybe Frank will do the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There doesn't seem to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of action by Mr. Balles regarding sending a study to Mark.


Passage number 158.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Mark. John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards someone named Mark.


Passage number 159.
 MR. BALLES. With regard to the business situation, our staff forecast is quite similar to the Board staff forecast in broad outline. The differences are not worth talking about because they are all within the range of the forecasting errors. So we have no problems there. Given that essential agreement, the issue comes down to the appropriate posture for monetary policy. When I first took a look at the Bluebook, Steve, I got quite a jolt. I thought you might really be arguing for what was in alternative B or even alternative A. But in summarizing the advantages and disadvantages of different ranges here, I think you have landed by coincidence or mental telepathy or something else almost exactly where I came out in wrestling with this. On M1 I would perhaps be inclined to go down to the alternative B level, given the staff's estimate on the ATS effects, which I have no reason to quarrel with and I know that's a difficult estimate to make. I could settle for either 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent as in alternative B or what you suggested, Steve, which was 2 to 5 percent. And for much the same reasons, which I won't take up your time to repeat, I think we would be well advised to come out with the [other] specifications Steve ended up with on balance--and considering what he called the PR effects or the Congressional relations effects--6 to 8-1/2 percent on M2 and 7 to 9-1/2 percent on M3. Among other things, Steve may remember that I tend to be one of the doubting Thomases around the table on shifts in money demand. such a shift is plausible and possible; it may even be a fact. But the trouble is, as we all know, that we don't know for sure until 2 / 6 / 7 9  -21- after the game is over. Sometimes we are wrong and sometimes we are right. It‘s a difficult bet to make. So, I concur with the way Steve came out as a means of hedging our bet. I think we would be well advised to do that, particularly in view of Steve‘s remarks that if we make too radical a downward shift in the ranges--even though policy within those ranges may, and I hope will, remain relatively on the tight side in view of the inflation problem--we could get some very severe public reactions, setting in train a whole new set of expectations of a credit crunch. So that’s why I come out where I do, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, states that there are no differences worth discussing in the business forecast and agrees with the appropriate posture for monetary policy. He expresses agreement with the range of alternatives presented by Steve and acknowledges the difficulty of making accurate predictions about money demand. Mr. Balles mentions the need to hedge their bet and considers potential public reactions to a radical downward shift in ranges. Overall, his remarks indicate agreement and support for the discussed monetary policy.


Passage number 160.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, John. Ernie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 161.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, on the general economic picture I think the staff projections are about as defensible a set of projections as one can put together at the present time, and I would not pick on any particular aspect of them. I have made a concerted effort since our last meeting, in view of my judgment that the prospects were rather good that we would have greater capital expenditures in ‘ I 9  than was being forecast or than the surveys were suggesting, to engage businessmen in discussion on this point. I have to report that I was unable to persuade even one of them that the prospects for capital expenditures are higher than are currently being forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Baughman, is expressing agreement with the staff projections and stating that he was unable to convince any businessmen to have a higher forecast for capital expenditures.


Passage number 162.
 MR. PARTEE. In the Dallas area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the conversation is taking place in the Dallas area.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 163.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. That’s where I had most of my conservations. And this is on the grounds that they are playing their cards close to their chests. They would much rather fix up, patch up, or put in a new machine when an old one breaks down and in fact go to overtime on their labor costs as compared with expanding basic capacity. It leaves them in a much more flexible situation. Also, they are able to pass on cost and price increases without much difficulty. The market takes it. So they just feel that’s the better way to go in the present environment. That substantially increases the possibility that we may have a sustained low growth situation, at least until that attitude is changed, because that seems to me to be a key element in [downturns]. And a major determinant of periods of economic expansion has been a surge in capital investment, which has brought very heavy pressure on the labor markets, materials markets, and credit markets. we do not see that at this time and, if our forecast is reasonably dependable, we are not projecting that we will see it for some time yet to come. There is another element in the picture that seems to increase the possibility [of a low growth outlook], and that is that neither consumers nor businessmen nor financial managers have yet fully adjusted to an expected ongoing rate of inflation somewhere near what we have forecast and, therefore, I think we will see a continued rapid buildup of debt. I’m concerned that the debt structure will become increasingly shaky and that to me is one of the bad aspects of a sustained period of either high optimism or rapid inflation. It means that when [inflation] does come to an end, we will have much more widespread debt distress and a much more difficult economic problem to handle. But it seems to me that we are likely to see that [buildup of debt1 continue for the next couple of years before we get into the painful adjustment part of it. 2/6/79 -22- One other general comment is that I think a set of economic programs and policies proposed by the government, which contemplates I to 8 percent ongoing inflation, is quite inadequate and quite unacceptable, particularly in this country. I believe there is a set of policies that could enable us to move promptly to wring inflation out of the economy without going through a recession and without substantially increasing unemployment, but thus far we seem to be committed to the idea that we must disavow using it. Well, having accepted the economic prospects and what seems to be a consistent set of monetary data along with them, I would opt for alternative B. Nevertheless, I am somewhat concerned about the sort of thing that Mark Willes mentioned--namely, that it's possible if we were at the top of the range on M1 to have growth that I think would be too much. That's all I have, Mr. Chainan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Baughman, expresses concern about the current approach to economic growth and inflation, particularly the emphasis on patching up old machinery instead of expanding basic capacity. He believes that this approach may lead to sustained low growth and a buildup of debt. However, he also mentions the possibility of a different policy approach that could address inflation without causing a recession or increasing unemployment. He ultimately chooses "alternative B" but acknowledges concern about potential excessive growth.


Passage number 164.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Ernie. Frank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply thanks Ernie, suggesting a positive and appreciative tone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 165.
 MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I have a very different perception of the economy than the staff has presented to us. I would like to think we could fine-tune the economy as nicely as our projection. But it seems to me that in the past month we have seen a very unusual combination of numbers. We've seen indicators not only in December but continuing in January that suggest the economy is coming on very strong. At the same time we have had an unusual deceleration in the growth of the monetary aggregates and bank credit. And the latest unusual phenomenon to add to these other two is that we have seen, despite a steady federal funds rate, a decline in short-term money rates. Now, this combination of a very strong economy, very weak monetary growth, and a decline in short-term money rates is rare. I looked back in history to find out when we usually get this combination, and I find that it typically occurs in months immediately preceding a business cycle peak. I think the closest parallel was January, 1960, when the economy was charging ahead following the resumption of steel production. Everybody was talking about the sizzling '60s. Both monetary and fiscal policy were moving toward restraint. And to me the first indicator of the 1960 recession was the surprising weakness in short-term money rates in January of that year. cycle peak in the second quarter and a mild recession in the last half of this year. the demand for money is not going to happen. So, Mark, I don't think you have to worry too much about that 2 percent. I was concerned, too, when I looked at the Bluebook. I think we should lower the ranges modestly. But the Bluebook reductions looked awfully big to me, given my expectations. But Steve has saved the day, after writing the Bluebook, by immediately disavowing it as imprudent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Mr. Morris disagrees with the staff's presentation of the economy and presents his own perception, pointing out unusual combinations of numbers and drawing parallels to past economic cycles.


Passage number 166.
 I think the numbers that Steve-- So I have concluded that the most probable expectation is a Now, in that environment, I think the projected decline in CHAIRMAN MILLER. He just wanted to check to see whether you read it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the speaker's thoughts and conclusions, as well as someone wanting to verify if the passage was read.


Passage number 167.
 MR. MORRIS. Yes. I think the numbers he came up with [today] are very prudent; I would like to see a widening of the M2 and M3 ranges to 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent but [otherwise] I think his suggested ranges are very appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the numbers and ranges presented, except for the suggested widening of M2 and M3 ranges.


Passage number 168.
 2/6/79 -23- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Frank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply appears to be a thank you message.


Passage number 169.
 Phil MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I guess I have a bit of a biased view of the world at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses having a biased view without stating what that bias is, so it cannot be determined if there is disagreement or contention present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Join the others. M R .  COLDWELL. The prospects are highly uncertain but still couched on the favorable side. The hard evidence we have had to date is for a strong economy with a very high rate of inflation. As for the monetary aggregates, I must admit I have never had much hope for them. And what they’re showing right now I would say is of doubtful validity. We are uncertain as to the implications and we can’t even describe why the changes are occurring. The information we have about the Administration’s estimates for 1979-80 suggest that those projections are unrealistic. I don’t think we are going to get a reduction in the rate of inflation, the rate of unemployment being held down, and a resumption of growth as promptly as they show. Even our own staff’s forecasts I would quarrel with in terms of the rate of inflation; I don’t think it will go down that smoothly. In my view the possibility is high that our rate of inflation will be in the 9 percent range. On net, then, the result is that we may face a problem of communication with the Congress, a little communications gap. In terms of [our objectives], I hope the Committee comes out somewhere in the area of 1 to 4 percent on M1, 5 to 8 percent on M2, and 6 to 9 percent on M3. I‘m coppering my bets a bit but I wouldn‘t go as far as Mark has. I don‘t think it is desirable to hold out to the rest of the world that there is the potential of a 6 to 10 percent increase in M1 if we are going to tell them that we have a 3 percent shift because of ATS and another 2 percent downward shift; that I think is unrealistic. I don’t like the idea of narrowing the ranges in a period of extreme uncertainty. C H A I W  MILLER. Thank you, Phil. Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that the monetary aggregates being shown currently are of doubtful validity, while another speaker disagrees and expresses hope for specific ranges for M1, M2, and M3.


Passage number 171.
 MR. WALLICH. Everything that can be said is bound to have been said. I’m impressed by the fact that in the two quarters before what must be the best advertised and predicted recession, if it comes, the economy has been growing well above potential--at 6 percent and 4 percent rates--and we have had a steady pattern of underpredicting inflation. The rate of inflation is always worse than we think it is. We have, as we have learned from the Economic Report, far less room on the up side in terms of where the potential limits are than we thought. The Council cut that from 5 or 5-1/2 percent, I think to 2-1/2 percent. The outlook may well be as the staff describes, but I have the impression that outside forecasters are postponing the timing of the recession, pushing it ahead. As for the signals that frequently are implicit in the soft money supply or weak aggregates that Frank Morris referred to, while I think our staff reads those too, those signals seem to me to have been somewhat disavowed by the course of events. Meanwhile the dollar is still very vulnerable even though it has improved. And on the financial side we are told by many observers that monetary policy really isn’t biting. I personally think that real interest rates are barely positive and they’re negative after taxes. Nonprice terms of lending are gradually being tightened, but that’s the main biting element, though some restraint 2/6/79 -24- may be coming from the weak liquidity position of corporations. are the elements of restraint that I see. Those Well, in the light of this, I think we do have considerable risks on the up side. more on inflation than on GNP. I'd like to fix the aggregates accordingly, and I share the numerology that Mark Willes engages in. I see three factors of shift, as it were. One is the ATS shift of 3-1/4 percent: two seems to be the demand curve shift. The third, which of course others have recognized too, is the increase in velocity that comes with rising interest rates. so these three things really have to be factored in. When you are concerned about where this added velocity is coming from, bear in mind all the quasi-monies that are being increasingly used now--the Euro markets, RPs, and money market funds. We overlook what are sources either of money or of increases in velocity which make that 2 percent shift not at all that ambitious, it seems to me. So my numbers would be 1/2 to 3-l/2 percent on M1--this is alternative C, which I have modified just a little--4 to 7 percent on M2 and 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent on M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal impressions and opinions about the state of the economy and the risks it may face.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Henry, and thank you all. I would suggest, before we try to synthesize this and before I give you my own reaction, that we take our coffee break. The coffee has been cooling €or the last half hour. So, why don't we do that and then we will resume.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite and practical suggestion to take a coffee break before continuing.


Passage number 173.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let's see, are most of us here. A l l  those who count are. Well, let's see if we can resolve the problems that we face on these long-run ranges. I was first guided by the eloquence of the discussion that has already occurred. Then to be practical I looked at the numbers that come out on paper and the eloquence goes away and the practicality comes out. I don't think we will be able to bracket everyone's first desire and have numbers that will be supportable. Perhaps we should try to do something unusual, and that is concentrate first on M1. If we throw out a lot of numbers. we may get confused. It seems to me that I heard perhaps less immediate concern about--or firmness in people's views on--the ranges for M2 and M3. If you are agreeable, I would like to see if those of us on the Committee could [reach a consensus] on what we should use for M1 and then see if we can adapt the M2 and M3 to it. Will that be all right with everyone. That's an unusual procedure, I know. AS I looked down the numbers [you suggested] and then asked myself what I think is desirable, considering the probabilities on ATS and a shift in the demand function of money, it seems to me that 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent brackets most people's views [for Ml] and is probably a range that we could live with in terms of our own objectives. Now, there are a few people outside that range but that seems to be most compatible with [the preferences of] most of the members. I'd like to try that out and see if it is supportable. It happens to be exactly consistent with Ernie Baughman's suggestion. He's the only one, I guess, who had the right number. The rest were bracketed around that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is describing a discussion and decision-making process.


Passage number 174.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. But maybe for the wrong reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It seems to be a statement expressing a possibility or doubt without any opposing views presented.


Passage number 175.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck came close with 2 to 4-1/2 percent. I don't know whether he's willing to drop his bottom number to 1-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 176.
 2 / 6 / 1 9  -25- MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any clear statements or arguments to indicate contention or disagreement. It appears to be a combination of random numbers, a date, and initials.


Passage number 177.
 Gentlemen, may I point out that that implies rising interest rates on our-- MR. PARTEE. 1-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage provided does not include any disagreement or contention. It is a statement followed by an interruption from Mr. Party.


Passage number 178.
 MS. TEETERS. The 1-1/2 to 4-112 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any argument or conflicting opinions. It is a simple statement or line without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 179.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. The [lower] end of that, yes, but it depends. If we are at the upper end of that and if some of these other things take place, our money rate growth will be faster than it has been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a conditional statement about the potential growth rate of money.


Passage number 180.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without actually reading or analyzing it. Please provide the passage you would like to have assessed.


Passage number 181.
 That's right CHAIRMAN MILLER. On the up side [Ml growth] will be faster than it has been: on the down side it could be consistent with what we have had or it could be lower. So, what we are really doing is widening the [range], which just means I will catch a little devil from the Chairmen of the [Banking] Committees, but I am willing to do that. They won't like this spread, but if we take this spread plus the variables and add them, we have a range of minus something to plus 10 percent. That's how I read it, as I look at the mathmetics or make certain assumptions. That's why it seems to me to be a range we can live with. Now. I also believe that we have to be sincere about being willing to rearrange these ranges at midyear. At that point we may be wise to begin to narrow them because we will have six months of actual data and we will be looking at what we should do for the balance of the year within the same cone. Whether the cone should go out and then close in after midyear when we've seen [some data], I don't know. Anyway, how many of the voting members could support a range of 1 - 1 / 2  to 4 - l / 2  percent now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing projections and ranges for economic growth and indicating a willingness to accept a wider range initially but potentially narrow it down later based on actual data. There is no indication of disagreement or conflict among the voting members.


Passage number 182.
 MR. PARTEE. I would point out, Nancy, that there was no reference made to this table on page 1 4  [of the Bluebook].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a fact that there was no reference made to a specific table on page 14 of the Bluebook. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement between parties.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 183.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. We should [adopt] that, I think, although that's short term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The phrase "although that's short term" suggests some potential hesitation or disagreement about adopting the idea being mentioned.


Passage number 184.
 MR. PARTEE. The midpoint of it, yes, but not really [the whole range].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "The midpoint of it, yes, but not really [the whole range]" does not indicate disagreement or contention. It suggests a nuanced perspective or clarification.


Passage number 185.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. It looks to the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "It looks to the fourth quarter" does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or observation without indicating any conflicting opinions or views.


Passage number 186.
 MR. PARTEE. It looks to June and to the middle of the fourth quarter. It tells us how much growth we have to have in the future to make up what has happened to date. And I believe the midpoint of the ~1 range is what's now being proposed [as our objective], isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is seeking clarification and confirmation of the proposed objective.


Passage number 187.
 MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 188.
 That's correct MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's correct MR. PARTEE" suggests agreement and affirmation.


Passage number 189.
 So, to get up to the midpoint of the proposed long-term range-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Which is the 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a proposed long-term range without any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 190.
 MR. PARTEE. --we'd have to have 8 . 3  percent growth between now and March and 5.1 percent between now and June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states the growth percentages required and does not present any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 191.
 And those are-- 2/6/19 -26- MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given passage does not contain any content or information, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 192.
 That’s only because we had negative rates of growth for-- MR. PARTEE. I understand that, but we’ve got that behind us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging a fact and the other person is expressing their understanding of the situation.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, and that’s why it can grow faster from here on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating that something can grow faster in the future.


Passage number 194.
 MR. PARTEE. I don’t think the comment you made that it implies higher interest rates is necessarily true, Nancy. It depends on the economy. If the economy is strong and we get a lot of inflation, they probably would go higher; but otherwise I think it is fairly neutral.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both parties are expressing their opinions and offering different perspectives, but there is no direct disagreement or argument.


Passage number 195.
 MS. TEETERS. The [projected funds rate] ranges [shown in Appendix I of the Bluebook] are 10 to 10-1/2 percent for the first quarter, 10 to 10-314 for the second quarter, 9-3/4 to 10-3/4 for the third, and 9-1/2 to 10-1/2 for the fourth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating the projected funds rate ranges for each quarter. There is no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 196.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may not be the most reliable projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "may not" in the passage suggests uncertainty or disagreement about the reliability of the projection.


Passage number 197.
 MS. TEETERS. Well, I don’t think any of these projections is reliable, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. TEETERS simply expresses her opinion about the reliability of the projections.


Passage number 198.
 MR. AXILROD. If I may say so, Mr. Chairman, on our projected interest rates perhaps we’ve swung too much to giving ranges. We thought they would be helpful. But, Governor Teeters, while we have allowed for some increase. it’s the midpoints that we think are the most likely [for the funds rate] and the midpoints are 10-1/4 and 10- 3/8 percent [for the first and second quarters respectivelyl. We’ve allowed for the possibility of some upward drift in the midpoint because we think the economy looks stronger in the first half than in the second half. Basically, the staff feels that interest rates would be essentially unchanged ov@r the year, with a possibility of a little upward drift in the first half and a little downward drift in the second half. That’s how we have been interpreting it. If we had just put down the midpoints down, that table would read 10-1/4, 10-3/8, [10-1/41, and 10 percent, in essence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 199.
 MS. TEETERS. Well, Steve, in my limited experience on the Board I have found that the interest rates are always at the top of the range. M R .  PARTEE. Your experience only covers a very short period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is stating her own limited experience and Mr. Partee acknowledges the limited time period it covers.


Passage number 200.
 MS. TEETERS. That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters simply agrees or confirms what has been previously stated.


Passage number 201.
 I thoroughly agree with you, but-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, these ranges have been created from the fourth quarter, without the expectations of the low rate of growth we have had in the aggregates so far in the year. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker begins by expressing agreement, but then presents additional information to clarify or add context to the agreement.


Passage number 202.
 MR. AXILROD. Well, no, the interest rate assumptions take all of that into account. They were merely meant to express the staff’s view that if interest rates were going to go anywhere, it is more likely to be up than down in the first half and more likely to be 2/6/19 -21- down than up in the second half given the GNP projections. just meant to give that sense to the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the interest rate assumptions and the reasoning behind them.


Passage number 203.
 This was CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right. Let’s try the 1-1/2 to 4-112 percent again. How many of the voting members would be willing to support that. I saw Paul’s hand, and I count Chuck, Ernie, Bob, Dave, Phil, myself--oh and Nancy. How many is that. Okay, thank you. How many would not. I count two. That sounds like a pretty overwhelming concensus. Now we will have to work on the other two members to get them straightened out so we can have a unanimous vote. Before we decide on that, however, let’s look at M2 and M3. It’s hard to make much of the figures and it‘s tough to come up with the right numbers. The question of widening the ranges is with us again. If we were willing to widen them, Steve’s suggestion, if I interpret it correctly, was for ranges of 5-112 to 8 percent and 6-112 to 9-112 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply counting the number of voting members who support a certain percentage and noting that there are two members who do not support it. The mention of "working on the other two members" suggests that the goal is to have a unanimous vote, but there is no direct disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 204.
 MS. TEETERS. No, it was 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a numerical range without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 205.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Excuse me, did I say something wrong. It was 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent and 6-112 to 9-112 percent. Jot those down. Put along side them two alternatives of 5 to 8 and 6 to 9 .  That is shaded down just 1/2 point. How many of the voting members would like the widened Axilrod numbers of 5-112 to 8-1/2 percent and 6-112 to 9-112 percent. Two members. How many would like the 5 to 8 percent and 6 to 9 percent. Three. How many could accept it. Four, and I could accept that, so it’s five. Five and two is seven. Apparently three want something else. Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information and asking for confirmation.


Passage number 206.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Partee or any potential contention or disagreement.


Passage number 207.
 Mark, I think, wants it much lower CHAIRMAN MILLER. I‘m just looking [at my notes]. You would want something lower, [Mark]. Who didn’t vote. Dave, what would you like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a conversation between individuals discussing their preferences.


Passage number 208.
 MR. EASTBURN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 209.
 I’d prefer something a little higher MR. PARTEE. So you ought to be put at least in the Axilrod group.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a preference and suggestion without indicating any conflicting views or opposition.


Passage number 210.
 MR. EASTBURN. I would prefer Steve’s original [suggestion].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Eastburn is simply expressing his preference for Steve's original suggestion.


Passage number 211.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. Given the presumption, M r .  Chairman, that we have a consistent set of numbers in alternative B, so far as one can argue there’s consistency there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 212.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I just want to get the votes again. These were straw votes. There were two for the wider Axilrod ranges and five for the slightly lower ones. [One] would like to be higher than either of these and I gather the other two would like to be lower, is that right. Having heard all of that, let’s put together another proposal of 1-112 to 4-112 percent for M1, 5 to 8 percent for M2, and 6 to 9 percent for M3, with an associated range of 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent for bank credit. Maybe I should have left that off. We can come to that separately, if you like. I didn’t find anybody differing from what Steve suggested [on bank credit]. Well, in fact there was only one suggestion that was different. Kyle, I think you suggested shading it a bit. But I think everybody else either accepted it or 2/6/79 -28- ignored it. Now, forgetting bank credit, just taking M1, M2, and M3, let's do a tentative vote by roll call to see if we could get support for that. I would support that package.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different options and gathering opinions from others.


Passage number 213.
 MS. TEETERS. What interest rates go with this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the question and does not provide any differing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 214.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, it's for a whole year. We can't really tell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact and there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 215.
 MS. TEETERS. I mean what does it imply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Ms. Teeters, expressing her curiosity or confusion about something.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: We cannot determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context.


Passage number 217.
 For the upper end of the ranges, it could imply, I would assume it would imply the higher-- MR. PARTEE. The staff thinks that the interest rates in Appendix I go with it, assuming that their GNP projection is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the staff believes the interest rates in Appendix I correspond with their GNP projection.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no statement or information present in the passage to indicate contention or disagreement. The mention of "CHAIRMAN MILLER" alone does not provide enough context to determine any disagreement.


Passage number 219.
 Except that we have M2 and M3-- MR. PARTEE. A little higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Except that we have M2 and M3" is not expressing any disagreement or contention; rather, it is providing additional information or clarification. The mention of MR. PARTEE and a little higher does not indicate disagreement either, as it is not clear what is being referred to.


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. --a little higher than the staff's "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that something is slightly higher than a certain measurement.


Passage number 221.
" MR. WALLICH. With the M1 range, I think we can get to 10 or 10-1/2 percent growth here, which is equal to nominal GNP growth and therefore would require no rise in interest rates. I'm talking about 10 percent, not the midpoints.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is expressing his opinion about the possibility of achieving 10 or 10-1/2 percent growth without increasing interest rates.


Passage number 222.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 223.
 On the other hand, if we get a cyclical decline of the kind Frank was talking about-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. We'll have lower rates. M R .  PARTEE. --rates are going to come down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be observed in the interruption by M R . PARTEE, suggesting a different outcome regarding interest rates.


Passage number 224.
 MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, are you planning to elaborate on the adjustments in M1 as has been discussed at the staff level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks for clarification on a specific topic without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 225.
 Or are we going to go public, in effect, with these M1 figures, making some allusion to the ATS effects in the-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. These will be disclosed publicly in the written report to Congress. That will be the first and only public disclosure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the plan to disclose M1 figures and ATS effects in a written report to Congress.


Passage number 226.
 It is contemplated that the report will make it very clear that the M1 numbers are based upon an adjustment for ATS and it will say something about velocity and demand, but I don't think-- MR. PARTEE. We're hopeful that velocity will grow more than normal but we won't put that in those numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the expected contents of a report.


Passage number 227.
 MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since the passage is incomplete, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 228.
 Will the 3 percent figure be described or the 5 percent on the-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. I don't think the 5 percent will be but 3 percent will get discussed because if it isn't in the report I will be asked specifically what we have assumed. We can't be deceitful about it; we have to tell them the truth. The truth is that on the basis of [our estimate of the effects of] ATS accounts, forgeting any change in demand curve, we have 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent for MI.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that the 3 percent figure will be discussed, while the 5 percent figure will not. They also emphasize the importance of being truthful in their reporting.


Passage number 229.
 2/6/19 -29- MR. COLDWELL. Which is an increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a date and reads "Which is an increase."


Passage number 230.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Which is what we were trying to do before, so we could get within it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 231.
 MR. COLDWELL. The prior M1 range was 4-1/2 to 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a range of numbers without any conflicting information or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 232.
 MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 233.
 No, 4 to 6-1/2 MR. PARTEE. And we were taking 6-1/4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they were taking 6-1/4.


Passage number 234.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. We were going from 4 to 6-1/2 percent and we were always on the upper side or out of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact about a numeric range without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 235.
 MR. WALLICH. We were essentially ratcheting it up by first going to the upper side of it and then by chosing a range that would make the upper side fall in the middle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "choosing a range that would make the upper side fall in the middle" suggests that there is a disagreement about how to determine the appropriate range or limits.


Passage number 236.
 MR. PARTEE. Assuming that ATS accounts continue to grow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating an assumption about the growth of ATS accounts.


Passage number 237.
 MR. ALTMA".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The provided passage "MR. ALTMA" does not have enough information for me to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 238.
 Vice Chairman Volcker President Baughman Governor Coldwell President Eastburn Governor Partee Governor Teeters Governor Wallich President Willes President Mayo Yes Yes Yes Yes oh, I guess so Yes NO No Yes CHAIRMAN MILLER. Now let's take an official vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The different opinions expressed by Vice Chairman Volcker, President Baughman, Governor Coldwell, President Eastburn, Governor Partee, Governor Teeters, Governor Wallich, President Willes, and President Mayo indicate a lack of consensus or agreement on the matter being discussed.


Passage number 239.
 MR. ALTMANN. Do you want me to call the roll again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a question being asked by Mr. Altmann.


Passage number 240.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. No. Does anyone wish to change his or her vote from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks if anyone wants to change their vote, which does not imply any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 241.
 MR. PARTEE. I'll change my "I guess so" to "yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 242.
" CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, thank you. That was a pause brought to an affirmative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response is positive, acknowledging gratitude.


Passage number 243.
 MR. WALLICH. Is it appropriate to ask, Mr. Chairman, whether this dissent would cause you any serious inconvenience in the hearing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question being asked by Mr. Wallich to the Chairman.


Passage number 244.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, I don't think so. We should operate on a rule that everyone votes as they see fit; that has been our policy. We are in a time when we see foolish stories about this sort of thing in the press that people love to play on, but I don't think we should let that change our desire to vote our conscience. I don't see any embarrassment. It always is better to have stronger support, but it isn't essential.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion on voting and discussing the influence of media stories, but there is no opposing view or conflicting perspective present.


Passage number 245.
 MR. WALLICH. Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing gratitude or thanks.


Passage number 246.
 MR. ROOS. May I ask Scott a question, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question being asked.


Passage number 247.
 2/6/79 -30- CHAIRMAN MILLER. You certainly may.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement granting permission.


Passage number 248.
 MR. ROOS. When the Chairman describes the adjustment for ATS accounts and so forth, if that is perceived as being a more expansive policy than the one we had last year, would that have a depressing effect on the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about the potential impact of a policy on the value of the dollar.


Passage number 249.
 MR. PARDEE. If it is perceived that way, but I'm not sure it would be written that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 250.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 251.
 All these numbers are lower than before, and the foreigners might perceive it-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, no matter what we say about M1, the fact is that M2 and M3 are lower. So in that sense the people who don't want to listen to us on M1 are people who just don't want to listen, because we are just getting a more logical M1 range consistent with monetary restraint and the other ranges are coming down. S o  if they are willing to give us even the first opening statement, they have to see this as a posture that is consistent with what we have been trying to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is explaining that certain numbers (presumably related to monetary measures) have decreased and that this is a logical result of monetary restraint. They are suggesting that those who do not want to listen to them about one specific measure (M1) may not be willing to see the overall consistency in their approach. There is no explicit disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 252.
 MR. COLDWELL. What these numbers say is that we can go as low as 1-1/2 percent and as high as 9-1/2 percent and still be within the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell is simply stating the range of percentages without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas being presented.


Passage number 253.
 MS. TEETERS. No, it means we can go as low as minus 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 254.
 MR. COLDWELL. No, we won't publish it, but if we add the 3 percent plus the 2 percent shift, that gets it to 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or calculation.


Passage number 255.
 MR. PARTEE. 1-1/2 percent is not the bottom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee regarding a certain percentage.


Passage number 256.
 MR. COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only mentions "Mr. Coldwell" without providing any additional information or context.


Passage number 257.
 If we don't get either one of those it could go to 1-1/2 percent, so I say the range is 1-1/2-- MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own opinion or prediction about a certain range of percentages, but there is no conflicting view or argument from another person.


Passage number 258.
 No it's a minus-- MR. PARTEE. It's below that because we might have a negative on the demand shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the value is below a certain point.


Passage number 259.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, I think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Based on the given information, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 260.
 The ATS doesn't go the other way but we could get-- MR. PARTEE. The ATS won't reverse; it can stop, but it won't reverse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement present. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the behavior of the ATS (presumably referring to a particular technology or system). There is no opposition or conflicting view expressed.


Passage number 261.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. So we are talking 0 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply presents a range from 0 to 9 percent without expressing any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 262.
 MR. COLDWELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The answer is yes because the presence of the word "yes" suggests that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, this answer may vary depending on the context and content of the passage.


Passage number 263.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's what I said when I introduced the subject. I said we have widened the range. The probability of hitting it is better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their previous comment about widening the range and expressing optimism about the improved probability of hitting it.


Passage number 264.
 MR. PARTEE. This kind of a range, of course, is just for discussion inside this room.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating that the range is for discussion purposes within the room.


Passage number 265.
 2/6/19 -31- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Of course. I hope we don't hear about it elsewhere or in any other way. Dave, do you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a hope that the mentioned subject will not be discussed or shared elsewhere, followed by a question asking if there is any further inquiry.


Passage number 266.
 MR. EASTBURN. Yes. Can I assume, in the part of the report that asks us to talk about the consistency between [our objectives] and the Administration's program, that this will pose no problem of inconsistency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asked by Mr. Eastburn seeking clarification about the potential consistency between their objectives and the Administration's program.


Passage number 267.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, the question is not the consistency, but the relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the question being discussed is not about consistency, but rather about the relationship.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 268.
 MR. EASTBURN. All right, the relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "All right" suggests that there was a previous discussion or disagreement, and Mr. Eastburn's response implies that he is conceding or giving in to the other person's point of view.


Passage number 269.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. If one looks at the Administration's short- range goals, I would say based on our own [projections] that for 'I9 those goals could be achieved within this [set of ranges]. Now, I think that we have more possibility of divergence in 1980, but we have not yet locked in our 1980 ranges. And, therefore, I think our report can indicate that kind of posture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing projections and potential divergence in goals, but they do not express any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 270.
 MR. PARTEE. I think we can say it's supportive but that we will have to review it as time goes on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 271.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. And it depends, of course, upon real events in the economy over the period of time as distinguished from goals. They have changed and shifted a little, of course. We have been talking about our projections of what will happen under certain assumptions. But our comments are to be against what the Administration might be intending to accomplish. And they may not be able to achieve what they are hoping.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains that projections and assumptions are being made about future economic events, while also acknowledging that these projections may not align with the goals or intentions of the Administration.


Passage number 272.
 MR. PARTEE. It's goals rather than projections on their part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "It's goals rather than projections on their part."


Passage number 273.
 can say well that's what we tried to do and then we got higher or lower-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's right. So they have an out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply agreeing with the previous statement and emphasizing that there is an alternative option available.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 274.
 They MR. COLDWELL. I'd tell them it's unrealistic even to try.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement "I'd tell them it's unrealistic even to try" suggests disagreement or contention.


Passage number 275.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, we will get into the report next week. Did we have any final shifts one way or the other. We didn't pick up any more positive votes. All right then, that's a vote. Let's turn to the next subject on my agenda which is to deal with current monetary policy and the domestic policy directive. We will turn to Steve again for his recommendation. As you know, [on the long-run decision] we have been referring to the alternatives as "A," "B," and "C." We now will go through alternatives "I," "11," and "III" on page 11, which is also relevant to page 14.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the process and agenda for a meeting, without mentioning any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 276.
 MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 277.
] CHAIRMAN MILLER. So are you suggesting alternative I for M1 or are you suggesting 4 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The person is suggesting two alternatives, alternative I for M1 and 4 to 9 percent.


Passage number 278.
 MR. AXILROD. I would think about 4 to 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It simply states an estimate given by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 279.
 2/6/19 -32- CHAIRMAN MILLER. And leaving the fed funds range where is is. Is that what you're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for clarification or confirmation of a statement made by the other person.


Passage number 280.
 MR. AXILROD. And an asymmetrical interpretation of the directive--that is, to permit tightening if growth moves above the midpoint of the 4 to 9 percent range but not easing until growth got to the bottom of the range. That was [the bias] the Committee adopted last time in its directive at the December meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a description of the Committee's adopted bias in their directive.


Passage number 281.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. May I ask the Committee, all members, whether there is any sentiment for the alternate directive, which would deal with the proposition of not reducing the funds rate between now and the next meeting but would look to the possibility of raising it. That is, in effect, putting upper side limits on M1 and M2 and upper limits on the fed funds rate. This is the alternative [directive wording1 that's on page 21 in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for the committee members' opinions on an alternative directive.


Passage number 282.
 If there is a sentiment for that, we should go into depth on it; if there is not we might turn back to the more-- VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I like it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing their personal preference by saying "I like it." However, there is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement among other individuals mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 283.
 MR. PARTEE. I would prefer the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a preference.


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Would you raise your hand if you are interested in this [alternative language] on page 21 and then we will see who is not. SPEAKER(.). Voting members only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The speaker is asking voting members to indicate their interest in the alternative language on page 21 by raising their hand. There is no disagreement or contention mentioned in this passage.


Passage number 285.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, let's just get everybody's sentiment for the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that they would like to hear everyone's opinion or feeling about something.


Passage number 286.
 MR. ROOS. What are we voting on right now, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 287.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Just whether you'd be interested in--not that you are voting for it--what's on page 21. If there is no reason to discuss it, we needn't waste our time. One, two, three, four, five. How many would not be interested in it. Okay. We'd better do that again with voting members, hadn't we. HOW many voting members would not be interested in the directive type on page 21. One, two, three, four, five. That's going to make it tough. Why don't we see if we can work out the other [directive formulation] to everyone's satisfaction. If I could give you a little guidance, my preference, if we go for the directive language on page 19, is to have the same sort of asymmetrical directive we had last time. My reasons are simply that all of the discussion today, taking into account both domestic and international considerations and the confusion about what the real economy's performance means in relation to the performance of the aggregates, would indicate that we should be in an even keel stance until we see some reason to change. Or to put it another way, when you don't know what to do, do it very cautiously. Therefore, that would be my approach. Do you want to say something, Chuck. I was going to say if that is the case, then I think Steve's suggestions of 4 to 9 percent for M1 and 5 to 9 percent [for M21, looking at the possibilities indicated on page 14, would seem to be reasonable. That would mean that if we got toward the upper end of those ranges we'd be 2/6/19 -33- looking at tightening; but we'd have to go to the bottom and through it before we thought of relaxing. I would also like to say that, considering the time between this meeting and the next, if there is any real reason to shift policy, it seems to me that we should have a telephone conversation. I feel that we shouldn't get ourselves too locked into these numbers with the situation so fluid. We have a good telephone set-up now--it seems to work well--so it's not so hard to get everybody on [a conference call] to discuss [a policy move]. Now, if we do what I've just described, the question I'd like to hear discussed is: Should we leave the fed funds range at 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent or should we change it to 9-3/4 to 10-1/4 percent, looking at the fact that an even keel approach means we're not going to be putting much room on either side. Why don't we just get inputs. M R .  PARTEE. I was simply going to point out that I agree totally with what you said about even keel--that is, I think this is a time for a sticky funds rate unless we see something big happening. But then your specific proposal was a biased proposal, that we raise the funds rate if the aggregates are strong in the range and not [reduce] it if they are low. I see no reason for that asymmetrical treatment when, looking at that table on page 14, we are well below the lower end and indeed won't be getting up to the midpoint of the [longer-run] range by March unless we are at the very top of the [February-March] M1 range. I'm speaking of M1 now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests an asymmetrical directive, while another person disagrees and sees no reason for it. They argue that the current data suggests a cautious and even keel approach is more appropriate.


Passage number 288.
 So it seems to me that the idea at this stage of the cycle of an unbiased approach to rate-setting, depending on the performance of the aggregates is the one-- CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. Instead, it states the speaker's opinion that an unbiased approach to rate-setting is necessary.


Passage number 289.
 Yes, Chuck, I'm probably influenced a bit by the concern that if we reduce the fed funds rate in the next few weeks--unless something is happening that we can explain--I'd be worried about the international situation MR. PARTEE. I agree with that, but I don't see why we should raise the funds rate if the aggregates are strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both individuals express agreement with each other.


Passage number 290.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage as the passage itself is not provided. Please provide the specific passage you would like to analyze.


Passage number 291.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I suspect that is the issue more than any particular numbers we put down. I would want to be biased, so I'm on the opposite side of this from Mr. Partee. I might just interject that I consulted very carefully with my resident monetarist guru in New York and he assured me that he is not worried about the money supply figures at all at this time; [this weakness] would have to go on for several more months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker mentions that they are on the opposite side of Mr. Partee but does not provide any contradictory information or engage in a debate. They also mention consulting with their monetarist guru, but this is not presented as a point of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 292.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. He is absolutely purist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "He is absolutely purist" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply implies that "he" strongly adheres to purist principles or beliefs.


Passage number 293.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He is absolutely purist. He is as pure as he can be. He looked back at historical experience and these one-quarter deviations don't mean anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply describes someone as being very pure and dismisses small deviations as insignificant.


Passage number 294.
 MS. TEETERS. Only on the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a statement by Ms. Teeters, suggesting that there is only a positive aspect to a certain situation.


Passage number 295.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think this is precisely the point. We have had a pattern where the deviations on the down side have not been a one-quarter deviation but a one-cycle deviation. And we now 2 / 6 / 1 9  -34- have a one-quarter deviation on the down side and I want to be asymmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion and desire for asymmetry in a certain pattern or situation.


Passage number 296.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 297.
 MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I was just going to ask for some clarification and maybe offer an alternative solution. If I understood what Steve was saying, we would treat it on the down side as a money market directive; that is, we would ease the funds rate down if the rate of growth in the aggregates came in below 4 percent. Now, at the top, if we used a money market directive, that would not trigger [action] until [Ml growth reached1 9 percent. But if we treated that as if it were an aggregates directive, the midpoint would be 6-1/2 percent and it would trigger action at 7-1/2 percent. So as an alternative, it seems to me that if we took a straight money market directive, using 4 to 7-1/2 percent [for the M1 range], we wouldn't have to think about treating it asymmetrically. Action would be triggered at the top and the lower points at the two extremes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is simply asking for clarification and offering an alternative solution.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude from one person to another. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage.


Passage number 299.
 MR. EASTBURN. It seems to me that we get caught up in the formality of our system here as against the reality of the way we operate. In reality, the way we operate is that we have a federal funds rate that we more or less peg. We've been pegging it at 10 percent plus. If I interpret your recommendation right--and I would agree with you that we should keep it there--it seems to me that we can put any ranges in here that we want and we're going to peg the funds rate at 10 percent plus and we're going to have a telephone call if it varies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Eastburn, seems to be making a statement or observation rather than expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 300.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Our directive would be even keel and we would [have a conference] call if we think a change [is needed]. That solves our directive because it gets us ready for the Merrill case. If we lose the Merrill case, that will be our directive for the future. Go forth and do well and we'll be in touch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply outlines a directive and suggests a conference call if necessary. There is no conflicting information or opposing viewpoints presented in the passage.


Passage number 301.
 MR. MORRIS. I think that's more of a description of how the Committee feels about all of these ranges because it seems to me that if we have a telephone meeting it will take something really tremendous to trigger us off the 10 percent [funds rate] in the next few weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply stating his interpretation of the Committee's feelings about the situation.


Passage number 302.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's not a bad point. Maybe we ought to have a directive that says we will even keel it and if there are any significant changes, we'll consult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing or conflicting viewpoints. It simply suggests the idea of having a directive and consulting in case of significant changes. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 303.
 MR. WALLICH. Well, if Steve is right, we should have a month of very large increases [in monetary growth].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is simply stating a conditional statement about the possibility of having a month of very large increases in monetary growth if "Steve" is correct.


Passage number 304.
 And it seems to me that that might very well trigger either a telephone conversation or-- MR. PARTEE. It would. I have great confidence in Steve but, on the other hand, there just isn't a wisp of evidence of what he's predicting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the statement made by MR. PARTEE and expresses confidence in Steve but also acknowledges the lack of evidence for his prediction.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. On average Steve is always right, but not from month to month. Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention between Steve and Larry. It only states that Steve is generally right, but his accuracy may vary from month to month.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 306.
 2 / 6 / 1 9  -35- MR. ROOS. I just can't resist pointing out that, as I read this, there isn't very much sentiment within this group to use the Humphrey-Hawkins situation to signal a relatively important change in how we [handle] this--in other words, to widen the fed funds ranges significantly. By doing so we can be masters of the aggregates' destinies to a greater extent than we are. Apparently a great majority of us is still committed to pretty much sticking to doing business as we have in the past on these fundamentals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, believes that there isn't much sentiment within the group to use the Humphrey-Hawkins situation to signal a significant change in how they handle things. However, he also mentions that a great majority of the group is still committed to sticking to doing business as they have in the past on these fundamentals. This suggests a difference in opinions or approaches within the group.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 307.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, Larry, I don't know what the sentiment is. but I have a bit of a trouble thinking that we know enough about these aggregates and their stability to operate that way. We have this phenomenon that at some point, for some reasons, the money function shifts around on us. And how one measures that in a particular week or at a particular time I think is a very tricky business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses doubt and skepticism about the stability and measurement of aggregates in relation to the money function. They question if enough knowledge is available and express that it is a tricky business to measure the shift of the money function.


Passage number 308.
 MR. ROOS. Your St.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Roos.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 309.
 Louis guru would suggest targeting more on the base but-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, but you keep adjusting the base so that you go back to a constant situation and give no effect to the shifting around of the demand function of money. I would have very deep trouble [with that] because that isn't what is happening in the economy. The economy is shifting its preference as to how it holds these funds. If we say we're going to ignore that, yes we can operate that way. But I think we'd be out of touch with reality.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses deep trouble and disagrees with the suggestion of targeting more on the base, arguing that it ignores the shifting preference in the economy.


Passage number 310.
 MR. EASTBURN. And there is a significance attached internationally to what happens to the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no evident contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there is significance attached internationally to what happens to the funds rate.


Passage number 311.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 312.
 MR. ROOS. I will shut up [after this], Mr. Chairman, but I think there are a lot of sophisticated people who are trading in the dollar foreign exchange market who are aware of the realities of the aggregates too and who are somewhat suspicious [of our commitment to these ranges], due to the fact that our past practice has permitted the aggregates to overshoot. And I believe those people would welcome, in a dollar-supportive manner, some basic shift in our manner of functioning, although I perceive that we don't feel now is really the time to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and acknowledging that there may be others who share that viewpoint.


Passage number 313.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, if we want to put reserve requirements on mutual money market funds, that would be one place to start in order to get our aggregates back under the same definition and so forth. Mark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a potential solution or course of action related to mutual money market funds.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 314.
 MR. WILLES. I have a feeling that I'm about to vote for a money market directive, which means that in the years I've contested with this Committee the Committee has won and I've given in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Willes, expresses a feeling that suggests he disagrees with the idea of voting for a money market directive.


Passage number 315.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "CHAIRMAN MILLER" does not contain any information or context that would indicate whether there is contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement of someone's position or title.


Passage number 316.
 If we could only get other members to give in we would-- MR. WILLES. I would like to say that I'm very sympathetic to the suggestion Dave made; I think that's probably right. But I wonder if we ought not have some concrete notion just among ourselves as to 2/6/79 -36- what magnitude of growth in the aggregates would tend to precipitate a call. I say that because if Steve is right on the shift in demand for money in the first quarter at 3 percentage points and we have the ATS effect at 3-1/2 percentage points, we could have zero growth in measured MI for the first quarter and [in effect] M1 would still be growing at 6-1/2 percent. So if M1 growth were coming in at 6 percent on average during the first quarter, that would be [equivalent to growth of1 12-1/2 percent, and I don't think that's what we want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not expressing contention or disagreement. It is a comment that raises a question and seeks clarification or further discussion on a specific point.


Passage number 317.
 MR. PARTEE. Which is what the nominal GNP is; that's how it gets there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact regarding the calculation of nominal GNP.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 318.
 MR. WILLES. I understand. I just think we ought to have a not ion-- CHAIR" MILLER. Well, we ought to have an understanding and I don't know how best to articulate that understanding. Each of you sees the money numbers as they are published each Thursday. Having seen them, if we haven't called a meeting and you think we need to talk, just call us. I think we can leave it to communication; if anybody feels that it's time to talk, we'll talk. That's one way to do it. Then we don't have to [set] numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The disagreement arises from Mr. Willes expressing the idea that they should have a notion or understanding, while Chairman Miller suggests that they should rely on communication and calling for a meeting if necessary. This difference in opinions suggests a divergence in approaches to handling their financial situation.


Passage number 319.
 MR. PARTEE. You're talking about a real money market directive without any aggregates specified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement or clarification made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 320.
 It has been a long time since - - MR. BALLES. Has anybody thought about "tone and feel of the market . CH.+IR" MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 321.
 No, we haven't thought of that MR. AXILROD. May I suggest, if the Committee's sentiment is moving that way, that you might want to reconsider the virtues of the optional paragraph we put [in the Bluebook]. It's quite consistent with holding [current conditions in] the money market but it permits some tightening, which I assume the Committee wouldn't object to, if the aggregates were exceptionally strong. The Committee merely has to make a decision in advance of what [exceptionally strong] is. And that language would be quite consistent with reconvening through a telephone conference if the aggregates [were weak]. It really doesn't specify how weak they would have to be, but that could certainly be developed with the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting an alternative option for the Committee to consider.


Passage number 322.
 MS. TEETERS. Steve, that doesn't give us any leeway if they are exceptionally weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact and expresses concern about the lack of leeway in a given situation.


Passage number 323.
 MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Axilrod's stance or any potential disagreement or contention.


Passage number 324.
 No, but as I say, if-- MS. TEETERS. It s@ems to me that we'd want to have both options at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It seems like the speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting having both options.


Passage number 325.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. We're talking about discussing either direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the topic of discussion is choosing a direction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 326.
 MR. PARTEE. I think we want to look even-handed, too, and that [Bluebook] directive would not look even-handed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen from the phrase "I think we want to look even-handed, too, and that [Bluebook] directive would not look even-handed." The speaker believes that the Bluebook directive is not fair or impartial, indicating a disagreement or contention about the directive.


Passage number 327.
 2/6/19 -31- MR. COLDWELL. I don’t want to look even-handed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their reluctance to appear fair or impartial.


Passage number 328.
 MR. WALLICH. There is a strong reason for not letting the rate drop if we think the dollar is vulnerable. So I think we ought to limit that possibility--not cut it off absolutely, but not allow it without further discussion. We can make that decision, but it shouldn’t come about through the automatic workings of our instructions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Wallich suggests the idea of not letting the rate drop if they believe the dollar is vulnerable. He recommends limiting the possibility of a rate drop, but not completely eliminating it without further discussion. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in this passage.


Passage number 329.
 MR. PARTEE. But it’s equally true, Henry, that there is a strong reason for not letting the rate rise if we think the economy is vulnerable, and I think the economy is vulnerable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, acknowledges that there is a valid reason for not allowing the rate to rise if the economy is considered vulnerable. He further expresses his own belief that the economy is indeed vulnerable.


Passage number 330.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, if the directive were even keel, then we would not have any change from that even keel unless there were the votes for that. So it’s decided by whether more people think [the funds rate should be moved] in one direction or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing a hypothetical scenario based on the number of votes determining a change in the funds rate. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 331.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. I think it would be a mistake at the present time to adopt a directive, which would then be published, that does not have a reference to monetary aggregates. It will touch off a wave of speculation and concern as to what this group is doing and what changes we have made either in our mode of operation or our concept of how the system works. That would be unfortunate. Even if we are not going to pay attention to them, I think our statement should incorporate some aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Baughman, is expressing his opinion and suggesting that a directive should include reference to monetary aggregates. He wants to avoid speculation and concern by including this information in the statement, even if they are not going to pay attention to it. This does not involve any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 332.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the name "VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or information about their role or actions.


Passage number 333.
 It’s going to have the long-term ranges in there and it makes some reference to-- MR. BAUGHMAN. I mean the short-term ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It seems to be a continuation or clarification of a previous statement, rather than an opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 334.
 MR. PARTEE. We could refer to the improved telephonic system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting the possibility of referring to an improved telephonic system.


Passage number 335.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 336.
 Bob MR. BLACK. M r .  Chairman, Mark has said that he would go for a money market directive and I dislike them as much as he does. But to me something like 4 or 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent would make sense, so that we wouldn‘t let the aggregate fall below 4 or 4-1/2 percent without doing something about it. I think that’s really the crucial issue on the low end at this time. If they should grow at 1-1/2 percent, in view of the [recent] weakness we would still be pretty much around that 3 percent long-run growth path that we projected; in fact we wouldn’t be up to the midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Bob is simply expressing his personal opinion about what he thinks would make sense for the money market directive. He mentions that he dislikes money market directives, but does not specifically disagree with anyone else's opinion.


Passage number 337.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, there is no reason we can’t design a money market directive in the traditional sense with the understanding that if we get near the [limits] on either side [of the ranges] we won’t really move until we consult. It’s very simple. That will serve everybody’s purpose, and then if something is happening in the economy or something is happening that we don’t understand, we can have a telephone conference. How would you all like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing a solution and asking for opinions on it.


Passage number 338.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not too well. That definitely seems a little too neutral. I like that less than just saying that we’re going to stick with [a funds rate of] around 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only expresses personal preference and does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 339.
 2/6/19 - 3 8 -  CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, we are going to even keel and we're going to have a money market directive, but we're going to have an understanding that we are not going to move the funds rate until we talk to each other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they will maintain a stable position and have a money market directive, but will not make any changes to the funds rate without prior discussion.


Passage number 340.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In practice, I'm not sure it makes a lot of difference; obviously it's not going to be published for another month anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and stating that the timing of the publication does not make much difference.


Passage number 341.
 MS. TEETERS. That raises another problem, though. You're testifying on the 20th of February, and I'm sure you're going to be questioned fairly closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the timing of the testimony and anticipates that the person will be questioned closely. There is no indication of conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 342.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, this information will not be published. They never have bothered us on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement implies that the information will not be published and there has been no previous bother regarding it.


Passage number 343.
 MS. TEETERS. They never bother you on the short-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that "They never bother you on the short-term rates."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 344.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. No. they really haven't: they've been very good about that. reference [to neutrality] in the directive but the fact is that I don't feel neutral. And to word the directive like that sounds as if we're operating entirely biased against any change at all and that the only thing that's going to [trigger a] change is the aggregates. It ignores the foreign exchange market aspects entirely and ignores the fact that the risks to the domestic economy are on the inflationary side anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates disagreement or contention about the reference to neutrality in the directive and the way it is worded. The speaker expresses that they do not feel neutral and criticizes the directive for bias and ignoring certain aspects.


Passage number 345.
 And we should be able to-- VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The provided passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Vice Chairman Volcker that does not express any conflicting views or opposition.


Passage number 346.
 My problem is that there is a CHAIRMAN MILLER. I'm not sure I follow that. If this were a regular directive with ranges for fed funds and ranges for M1 and M2, why would it seem neutral.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is an expression of confusion or uncertainty about a certain topic.


Passage number 347.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement provided does not reflect any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 348.
 Because it tells me that-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's tied in to the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that is providing an explanation or reasoning.


Passage number 349.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's my problem. My problem is that it's tied entirely to the aggregates when I'm not indifferent on whether [the funds rate] goes up or down. I think the adverse risks of [the funds rate] going down are greater, due to the foreign exchange situation, than the adverse risks of it going up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's personal opinion about the risks associated with the funds rate going up or down.


Passage number 350.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. The trouble with that argument, Paul, is that we have a directive out now that has the same characteristic. [Money growth is] below the bottom of the range we published and yet we haven't reduced the fed funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply pointing out a flaw or issue with the argument being presented by Paul.


Passage number 351.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is the directive we have out now symmetrical or is it written in this asymmetrical way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is seeking clarification or confirmation about the nature of a directive or written text.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 352.
 MR. AXILROD. We've ignored the asymmetry. It was written with asymmetrical wording.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage implies that the asymmetrical wording has been disregarded or not given proper attention, suggesting a possible disagreement on the importance or significance placed on this aspect.


Passage number 353.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand we've ignored the bottom limit but it has some asymmetrical language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. The phrase "I understand we've ignored the bottom limit, but it has some asymmetrical language" simply acknowledges the absence of consideration for the bottom limit and points out the presence of asymmetrical language. There is no disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 354.
 2 / 6 / 7 9  - 3 9 -  CHAIRMAN MILLER. It’s money market on the down side and [refers to the] aggregates on the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is discussing two different financial topics - money market and aggregates - without expressing any conflicting opinions or contradictions.


Passage number 355.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. That sounds all right to me. I’d want to repeat that performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker seems to agree with what was previously discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 356.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right. Let‘s go around to the voting members and ask what you want to do. I’m not talking about the range now but I think we need to crystalize this one way or the other. Are we going to have a money market directive, are we going to have just an understanding, or are we going to have an asymmetrical directive or what. Let me go right down the list. Ernie. M R .  BAUGHMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for the opinions of the voting members, indicating that there are different possible options or approaches that people may have varying opinions on.


Passage number 357.
 I could go either with the suggestion Bob Black made, which seems to me to capture-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, that would be a money market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply expressing a consideration between two options.


Passage number 358.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. A money market directive with a 7-1/2 percent top on the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents a money market directive with a specific interest rate cap.


Passage number 359.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. We’ll come to the top of the ranges in just one second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is straightforward and does not involve conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 360.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. Or I can go with the biased alternative where we have essentially a money market on the down side and aggregates on the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any form of disagreement or contention. Instead, it provides two alternative options without expressing any preference or favor towards either one.


Passage number 361.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, the type we had last month. Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply referring to a particular type of something that they had last month, and mentions Dave.


Passage number 362.
 MR. EASTBURN. Well, I would hold the funds rate at 10 percent plus and consult if any of us feels that the aggregates are getting out of hand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Eastburn suggests holding the funds rate at 10 percent plus and consulting if any of the individuals involved feel that the aggregates (presumably referring to economic indicators like money supply and GDP) are becoming problematic. This is a suggestion rather than a disagreement, as it leaves room for others to express their opinions on the matter.


Passage number 363.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I’m sorry, I skipped Phil Coldwell; I just missed the initials here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging a mistake they made by skipping someone's initials.


Passage number 364.
 MR. COLDWELL. I would revise it upward, Mr. Chairman. I would go with 10 to 10-1/4 percent as a range for the federal funds rate in the coming months primarily because I think now is the time we run the greatest danger of an additional inflationary problem. Down the road we may have some chance to reduce [the funds rate range].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell is expressing his opinion and suggesting a revision to the federal funds rate, but there is no mention of anyone opposing or disagreeing with his viewpoint.


Passage number 365.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. You have a narrow bias upward. Chuck. M R .  PARTEE. Well, I would like an unbiased money market directive. I would accept some language about taking account of foreign exchange market developments but that’s as much of a bias as I would want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a preference for an unbiased money market directive.


Passage number 366.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as it was not provided.


Passage number 367.
 MS. TEETERS. I would take a money market directive with a funds rate range of 9-3/4 to 10-1/4 percent and consultation if the aggregates really get out of hand either way. I’d also have an eye on the foreign exchange market but [act] only upon consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. TEETERS suggests taking certain actions and consulting with others in certain situations, indicating a cooperative approach rather than a conflicting one.


Passage number 368.
 2/6/79 -40- CHAIRMAN MILLER. And, Paul, you‘ve expressed the view that you would prefer the asymmetric directive. Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage mentions Paul's preference for the asymmetric directive, but does not indicate any disagreement or contention regarding this preference.


Passage number 369.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation:
The word "right" is a standalone word in this passage and does not provide enough context to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 370.
 MR. WALLICH. I‘d like something that, if the aggregates strengthen, would quickly raise the rate into the 10 to 10-3/4 percent range and wouldn’t trigger [action] on the down side. So my preference, if it has to be done in an asymmetrical form, would be a money market directive on the down side--and I’d want a very low limit--and aggregates on the up side. That would suit me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal preference for a specific monetary policy action, but there is no indication of conflicting opinions or disagreement among others.


Passage number 371.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "CHAIRMAN MILLER" does not provide any context or content, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement in the passage based on that phrase alone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 372.
 Mark MR. WILLES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Explanation: The presence of Mr. Willes in the passage suggests the existence of multiple individuals with potentially differing opinions or perspectives, leading to the possibility of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 373.
 I think I’d like an unbiased-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. An unbiased money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses a preference for an unbiased money market directive.


Passage number 374.
 MR. WILLES. --but I’d like to retract what I said earlier; I think we have to have some aggregates in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Willes expressing a change of opinion or suggestion about the inclusion of aggregates in something.


Passage number 375.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without being provided with the specific passage to analyze.


Passage number 376.
 MR. MAYO. Surprisingly, I agree with Mark for a change. I think it would be a mistake, Mr. Chairman, to cut [the upper limit of the funds range1 from 10-1/2 to 10-1/4 percent. When it is published, it would give a wrong signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo states his agreement with Mark's viewpoint.


Passage number 377.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the passage itself.


Passage number 378.
 Well, if I read this right, Ernie would accept the money market alternative, Dave would prefer just the consultation-- MR. EASTBURN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states the preferences of Ernie and Dave regarding the alternatives mentioned.


Passage number 379.
 I have no particular concern about how we express this as long as the policy action-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy was for a money market directive, as were Mark and Bob, and Chuck--one, two, three, four, five, six. I think that‘s the way we‘re going to have to go if we are going to hang this together. Can we just look at this and see if we can get some agreement on the ranges and a money market directive. that Steve made was 4 to 9 percent on M1, 5 to 9 percent on M2, and the present range for fed funds, which is 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent. Perhaps I’d better have another go-around now that we’ve decided what we’re going to do [on the directive wording]. with a money market directive, what is the sentiment on those ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and seeking agreement on certain ranges and a money market directive.


Passage number 380.
 The suggestion Assuming we‘re going VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Too high on the aggregate ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no suggestion, contention, or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 381.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Ernie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to it. Please provide the passage or more context for a proper analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 382.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. I share that feeling; I think 9 or 9-1/2 percent [money growth] is too high for a money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates disagreement or contention as Mr. Baughman believes that 9 or 9-1/2 percent money growth is too high for a money market directive.


Passage number 383.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or making any statements that could be potentially disagreed with or disputed.


Passage number 384.
 MR. COLDWELL. Too high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell simply states that something is "too high," without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 385.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage alone cannot be accurately determined to contain contention or disagreement as it only consists of a single name, "Dave." There is no context or indication of any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 386.
 2/6/19 -41- MR. EASTBURN. I would buy these.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they would buy something, indicating a personal preference or willingness.


Passage number 387.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage about Chuck.


Passage number 388.
 MR. PARTEE. I would take a somewhat lower range on M1 and M2 than those suggested, but I would want to cut the funds range to 10-1/4 percent, [not retain] the 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent. I‘d focus on aggregates around those ranges, which I think is very close to what Dave proposed to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is stating that he would prefer a lower range on M1 and M2 but agrees with the suggested funds range of 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent. He mentions that his viewpoint is very close to what Dave proposed.


Passage number 389.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since no specific passage is provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 390.
 MS. TEETERS. I would buy 4 to 9 percent and 5 to 9 percent for M1 and M2 and cutting the upper limit on the funds range to 10-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by MS. TEETERS about buying percentages and proposing a reduction in the upper limit on the funds range. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 391.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since there is no specific passage provided, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement present. Please provide the specific passage so a proper analysis can be made.


Passage number 392.
 MR. WALLICH. The aggregate ranges are too high for me, particularly the midpoints.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply expressing his opinion that the aggregate ranges are too high for him, particularly the midpoints.


Passage number 393.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Mark. M R .  WILLES. I agree with what Chuck said, assuming he meant a low enough range on the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states agreement with Chuck's statement while adding a condition about the range of the aggregates.


Passage number 394.
 MS. TEETERS. HOW low is low. M R .  PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a conversation or exchange of information.


Passage number 395.
 I was thinking of cutting a point off CHAIRMAN MILLER. Both ends or just on top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase simply states different possibilities or options without expressing any opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 396.
 MR. PARTEE. Both ends.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The use of the word "Both" suggests that there are opposing views or positions being discussed.


Passage number 397.
 MR. COLDWELL. 3 to 8 and 4 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 398.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right. Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The provided passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply starts with "All right" and mentions a person's name, Bob, without any conflicting or opposing ideas being presented.


Passage number 399.
 MR. MAYO. I would buy the 3 to 8 and 4 to 8 but I would stick to the 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent funds rate range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and preference for certain funds rate ranges.


Passage number 400.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Now. we‘re in good shape. Let’s leave the rate question; the rate question sounds as if it’s whether to leave the top side at 10-1/2 percent or cut it back to 10-1/4 percent. will accept 3 to 8 percent and 4 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and stating that they are in good shape. They also mention that they will accept a range of percentages, but there is no indication of any disagreement or contention surrounding this statement.


Passage number 401.
 What we’re going to do now is see if there’s a majority who MR. WILLES. Sorry, Mr. Chairman, may I just ask a question. I‘m not sure what Steve is assuming in these numbers about the demand shift for the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 402.
 MR. AXILROD. A lot--3-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions a percentage.


Passage number 403.
 MR. WILLES. So if we got 8 percent growth for the 2 months, what would that be for the quarter if we get the 3-1/2 percent shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement providing a hypothetical scenario and asking for a specific calculation.


Passage number 404.
 2/6/79 -42- MR. AXILROD. The quarter is about 3/4 percent, so add 3-1/2 to that plus 3 percent [for ATSJ. if you want to put it in those terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of numbers and calculations.


Passage number 405.
 MR. WILLES. So we‘d get 6-1/2 to I-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a numerical range.


Passage number 406.
 MR. AXILROD. Somewhere on that order.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 407.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 408.
 I must say, Mark, that I really do think we’re talking about an arithmetic-- MR. WILLES. I’m just trying to understand, Chuck, what the numbers are. I think we’re talking about policy and not arithmetic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is disagreement or contention in the passage because Mr. Willes interrupts and expresses his need for clarification, suggesting that he disagrees with Chuck's perspective about focusing on policy instead of the numbers.


Passage number 409.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, Steve is frank to say that he is expecting these aggregates to pop back up and adjust this process. He is very frank to say so and is worried about dealing with that, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Steve's expectations and concerns.


Passage number 410.
 MR. AXILROD. Well, also, a considerable pop back up is needed to get them back on the Committee’s path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that a significant pop back up is necessary to guide the Committee back on their path.


Passage number 411.
 MR. PARTEE. Yes. we’re way below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement confirming that they are currently below something without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 412.
 MR. COLDWELL. Good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 413.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. We had a lot of sentiment going for ranges of 3 to 8 percent and 4 to 8 percent. We had at least 3 or 4 folks who said they would buy that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions that there is a lot of sentiment going for two different ranges of percentages and also mentions that there are at least 3 or 4 individuals who expressed interest in buying within those ranges. The passage simply discusses multiple opinions or preferences and does not indicate any disagreement or conflict between the people mentioned.


Passage number 414.
 MS. TEETERS. May I ask a question. If we went with that, what would that do to the funds rate. Does that continue to make the ranges consistent with a funds rate of around 10 percent. M R .  AXILROD. We think a 10 percent funds rate will yield about a 7 percent growth rate [for Ml]. The odds on that are not extremely high, so what the Committee is discussing is where it may wish to trigger a funds rate movement. I would interpret this [Ml] range to mean that if M1 were growing at a rate close to 7 percent or above, the Desk would probably be raising the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a dialogue where Ms. Teeters asks a question and Mr. Axilrod provides an explanation. There is no disagreement or conflict between them.


Passage number 415.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, I want to be sure we understand that we’re going to consult before we move [the funds rate]; we’re going to do that in any case. So these are triggering consultation more than they are triggering action, and I think that should be borne in mind in trying to resolve this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is an explanation of a process and clarifies that consultation will take place before taking action.


Passage number 416.
 MR. PARTEE. That’s why I think we ought to cut the funds rate range to a range [centered] around where we are, [by going to] 9-3/4 to 10-1/4 percent. I must say my notion for accepting these lower aggregates is associated with [the presumption of a centeredl funds rate--with the idea that [we will consult] if we run up toward the high end or down toward the low end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is expressing a personal opinion or suggestion.


Passage number 417.
 MR. COLDWELL. How would you like 9-7/8 to 10-3/8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage is simply asking for the speaker's preference regarding a percentage range, there is no disagreement or contention evident.


Passage number 418.
 MR. PARTEE. Where is it exactly now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 419.
 MR. HOLMES. About 10 percent or a little above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states a numerical figure without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 420.
 2 / 6 / 7 9  -43- MS. TEETERS. What are you suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage consists of a statement and a question, without any conflicting views or opinions expressed.


Passage number 421.
 MR. COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement as it only mentions a person's name, "MR. COLDWELL."


Passage number 422.
 9-7/8 to 10-3/8 percent--1/8th on either side to play with-- MS. TEETERS. I would be much more liberal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a preference for a more lenient percentage range.


Passage number 423.
 MR. MAYO. I'll bid 3/53.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states an action being taken by Mr. Mayo, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 424.
 MR. MORRIS. Well, all this not very important if we're going to have a consultation before we move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is expressing an opinion, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 425.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Here is a proposal, and you've got 3 minutes to decide and then we're going to lunch. Steve is suggesting that we could say this: "System open market operations are to be directed at maintaining the weekly average funds rate at about the current level, provided that over the February-March period the annual rates of growth of M1 and M2, given approximately equal weight, appear to be within ranges of 3 to 7 percent and 5 to 9 percent, respectively. If growth of M1 and M2 for the two-month period appears to be outside the indicated ranges, the Manager will promptly notify the Chairman, who will then consult with the Committee for supplemental instructions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be contention or disagreement because there is a time constraint of 3 minutes to make a decision, and the proposal includes specific conditions and ranges that may require further consultation and supplemental instructions. This may lead to differing opinions and discussions among the individuals involved.


Passage number 426.
" MR. PARTEE. So we use the full range of 3 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states that "we use the full range of 3 to 7 percent," without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 427.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the actual passage provided, it is not possible to provide a specific explanation.


Passage number 428.
 And there is no fed funds range MR. COLDWELL. But he has 5 to 9 instead of 4 to 8 percent [for M21.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply providing information about the Fed funds range and the specific numbers mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 429.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. But he compromised; he gave you 3 to I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The mention of compromise suggests that there was disagreement or a difference in opinion between two parties.


Passage number 430.
 MR. COLDWELL. On MI..
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unclear. There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 431.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This says we don't do anything while they are within the range but consult when [either] is outside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a procedure of not taking action when "they" are within a certain range, but consulting when either of them is outside that range. The information is presented without any conflicting opinions or contradictory statements.


Passage number 432.
 MR. MILLER. And if any of you wants to consult earlier, give me a call. I'm a very good consulter; I'll consult with the Committee on whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Miller is offering his consulting services and stating that he will consult with the Committee if necessary.


Passage number 433.
 MS. TEETERS. And leave the funds rate alone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters simply states her opinion or preference of leaving the funds rate unchanged.


Passage number 434.
 MR. BLACK. Did you specify a range or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asked by Mr. Black.


Passage number 435.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. No range on fed funds; leave it alone and if we're within these ranges, we hang in there. If growth moves out of those ranges we consult with the Committee to see if anybody wants to supplement the instructions. This is known as "copping out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that the range on fed funds should be left alone and if the growth moves out of those ranges, consultation with the Committee will happen to potentially supplement the instructions. The phrase "copping out" is used humorously to imply that seeking guidance is a reasonable course of action.


Passage number 436.
" MS. TEETERS. With the general understanding that we expect the rates to stay approximately where they are right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they expect the rates to remain stable, without any conflicting opinions or contradicting statements.


Passage number 437.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, the instruction would be to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is straightforward and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 438.
 MR. PARTEE. Maintain about the current rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement indicates that someone is being asked to maintain the current rate. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 439.
 2/6/19 -44- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Alan, do you have any problems with that. M R .  HOMES. None at all, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Alan, states that he has no problems with the situation.


Passage number 440.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, we could have said it in fewer words, couldn't we. Let's call the roll. I'll vote for that, which is known as the Axilrod compromise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that something could have been said more concisely and then expresses agreement with the proposed compromise.


Passage number 441.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no mention of the federal funds rate in here at all except it says we stay where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that there is no mention of the federal funds rate, and it explains that the current situation will remain unchanged. It does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 442.
 MR. ALTMA". Maintain the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. This is a simple statement referring to someone, Mr. Altma, who is being asked to maintain the funds rate.


Passage number 443.
 MR. WALLICH. It [sounds] a slightly ominous note because it suggests that if the aggregates behave for another period of time as they have behaved so far, then we'll make a decision to ignore them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Wallich, expressing his concern that if certain aggregates continue to behave in a certain way, a decision may be made to ignore them. The statement is presented without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 444.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Just as we've done in the last seven weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating that something has been done in the last seven weeks.


Passage number 445.
 MR. WALLICH. That's what one can read into that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply summarizing the information in a straightforward manner.


Passage number 446.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. What we can read now is that we've decided after our consultation not to lower the rate despite the aggregates. If anybody wants to read that the reverse is true now, they haven't read recent history. I'll vote for it anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they have decided not to lower the rate despite the aggregates and implies that anyone suggesting the opposite hasn't been paying attention to recent history. The last sentence expresses the speaker's intention to vote for the decision regardless.


Passage number 447.
 MR. ALTMA".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 448.
 Vice Chairman Volcker President Baughman Governor Coldwell President Eastburn Governor Partee Governor Teeters Governor Wallich President Willes President Mayo No Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, we have two recalcitrants who can finally redeem themselves by shifting their votes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement between the members mentioned (Governor Coldwell and President Eastburn) and that they have the opportunity to change their votes and resolve the disagreement.


Passage number 449.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [I'd like to] get a little more language in there about foreign exchange. It's in there but as such it says we look at the foreign exchange market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses a desire to include more language about foreign exchange in a certain context.


Passage number 450.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. We'll give you up to 6 words to improve that if you change your vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the reader will be given up to 6 words to improve something if they change their vote.


Passage number 451.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might improve it just by eliminating the words that follow the foreign exchange--those on the domestic financial markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author suggests improving something by eliminating certain words. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 452.
 MR. PARTEE. Who cares about the domestic economy. We're only concerned about the foreign exchange rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is disagreement or contention in the passage because the speaker, Mr. Partee, dismisses the importance of the domestic economy and emphasizes the sole concern with foreign exchange rates. This implies a difference in opinion or perspective from others who might prioritize the domestic economy.


Passage number 453.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER Well, what it says is "while giving due regard to the program supporting the foreign exchange value of the dollar, to developing conditions in domestic financial markets, and to uncertainties associated with the introduction of ATS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The chairman is simply stating what it says without expressing any opinion or disagreement.


Passage number 454.
" 2 / 6 / 1 9  -45- MR. BLACK. M r .  Chairman, could I just ask if we shouldn't elaborate beyond ATS and also mention money market funds. That has been a very powerful force.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is simply suggesting that they should consider elaborating on the topic of money market funds in addition to ATS.


Passage number 455.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage because the word "CHAIRMAN MILLER" is a name and does not have enough context to make a judgment.


Passage number 456.
 Well, we could say "to the uncertainties associated with the introduction of ATS and other shifts"-- MR. PARTEE. I really think we could do away with that whole phrase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee suggests removing a phrase, but there is no indication of someone disagreeing or arguing against his suggestion.


Passage number 457.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. That phrase could be left out, really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "That phrase could be left out, really" is a statement without any conflicting or contradictory elements. It does not imply disagreement or contention.


Passage number 458.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Leave out everything except the foreign exchange market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states to exclude everything else and focus on the foreign exchange market. There is no contention or disagreement present in the statement.


Passage number 459.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. We probably should take out the reference to ATS; I think you're right, Bob. We're singling out something that's a dead horse. We can just say "due to uncertainties," the fact that we don't really know. Phil, we're up to you. Did you shift your vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speakers are discussing a suggested change and seeking input from Phil.


Passage number 460.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are we. Did we leave out these phrases or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing confusion or uncertainty about the location due to the omission of certain phrases.


Passage number 461.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. While you're thinking about it, we'll go on to consideration of the Manager's recommendation with respect to foreign currency operations. Alan Holmes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states that while the reader is thinking about something, the conversation will move on to a discussion of the Manager's recommendation on foreign currency operations. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 462.
 MR. HOLMES. [Statement--see Appendix.] [Secretary's note: Mr. Holmes recommended an increase from $150 to $500 million in the Committee's informal limit on foreign currency holdings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that Mr. Holmes recommended an increase in the Committee's informal limit on foreign currency holdings, which indicates agreement rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 463.
] CHAIRMAN MILLER. Alan, as I understand it, this informal limit i s  really a limit [within the formal amount] of what otherwise could be held under the Foreign Currency Authorization. So what we're doing is saying that if we're on the long side, it will be less than the total allowable position--which could be bigger if we were on the short side. And I think that's a reasonable proposition, particularly if it is to be coupled with your proposal to bring us a memorandum on this so we can give it more careful attention. I don't think we run a risk during the period until you submit that memorandum, at the next meeting or so, in contemplating that we could hold up to $500 million of currencies. Does anybody feel differently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is clarifying their understanding of the informal limit and expressing agreement with the proposal mentioned.


Passage number 464.
 MR. HOLMES. I would guess that we wouldn't get to that amount. But the markets are so volatile these days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Holmes, is expressing uncertainty or speculation about reaching a certain amount in the markets. However, there is no contrasting viewpoint or argument presented in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 465.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I don't think we will either. But we have [acquired] a billion dollars of D-marks in a couple of days which was very favorable to us. And we might have other occasions where we want to continue-- M R .  PARTEE. Well, I don't think we ought to get ourselves into a substantial long exposure willy nilly, but I think what Alan is suggesting is within the range of operating necessity. Nevertheless, I would hate to see us acquiring $500 million, [going] up to $1 billion and then to $1.5 billion. Those things sometimes happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee expresses hesitation and caution about acquiring a substantial long exposure, while someone else (presumably Alan) suggests that it is necessary.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 466.
 2 / 6 / 1 9  -46- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Also, we don't want to make such a decision unless we intend to look at it in depth; this is not something we are trying to sneak up on. I just think we need some operating room.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Also, we don't want to make such a decision unless we intend to look at it in depth" suggests that there is a hesitancy or disagreement about making a decision without thoroughly examining it.


Passage number 467.
 MR. WALLICH. But we do need to look at this in depth at some point because we are getting to the point where we are operating in foreign currencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply mentions the need to thoroughly examine the situation of operating in foreign currencies.


Passage number 468.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Miller without providing any information or context that could suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 469.
 Absolutely VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to look at this question; I don't think this $500 million implies that we've answered it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement expresses the need to examine a certain question and implies that the mentioned $500 million does not provide a definitive answer.


Passage number 470.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the phrase "That's right." It is a statement that acknowledges agreement or correctness.


Passage number 471.
 MR. COLDWELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'd be satisfied as long as we don't get beyond the debt we now owe in any single currency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Coldwell expresses his satisfaction with not exceeding the current debt in any single currency without any opposition or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 472.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Then you are going to be long.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a statement of fact or prediction, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 473.
 MR. COLDWELL. Well, we're buying right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they are currently making a purchase.


Passage number 474.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have yen and we don't have any [yen] debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply stating a fact without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 475.
 MR. COLDWELL. I meant in terms of the $500 million cumulatively. M R .  WALLICH. You mean overall total debt equal to total balances. We have a large D-mark debt and we have yen balances. The $500 million will be much smaller than the D-mark debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell is seeking clarification on the $500 million figure, and Mr. Wallich explains that the D-mark debt and yen balances are much larger. Both individuals are providing complementary information and there is no disagreement between them.


Passage number 476.
 MR. COLDWELL. Well, that would be true for today, assuming we come back to this subject.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating an assumption or possibility.


Passage number 477.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. .my other comments. Alan, we need approval on the rollover of some our maturing swaps, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There doesn't seem to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation or agreement regarding the need for approval on the rollover of maturing swaps.


Passage number 478.
 MR. HOLMES. I recommend that they be rolled over on maturity if we can't pay them off before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It states a recommendation made by Mr. Holmes regarding the rollover of certain debts.


Passage number 479.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Is everyone familiar with this. [Information on] this has been circulated. May we have approval of that. Hearing no dissents, it is so approved. I must say the vote on our short-range specifications in the directive was 9 to 1. We had a famous switch for the final count.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents information and an approval without any indications of opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 480.
 MS. TEETERS. Who switched.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


