Passage number 1.
TRANSCRIPT FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE CONFERENCE CALL April 2 1 ,  1979 Prefatorv Note This transcript has been produced from the original raw transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding. Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses, and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE CONFERENCE CALL April 21,1979 PRESENT: Mr. Miller, Chairman Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman Mr. Black Mr. Coldwell Mr. Mayo Mr. Partee Ms. Teeters Mr. Wallich Messrs. Guffey, Moms, Roos, and Winn, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Messrs. Baughman, and Eastbum, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Philadelphia respectively Mr. Altmann, Secretary Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary Mr. Petersen, General Counsel Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel Mr. Axilrod, Economist Messrs. R. Davis, Ettin, Henry, Parthemos, Keir, Keran, Kichline, Scheld, and Truman, Associate Economists Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Board of Governors Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, Board of Governors Messrs. Fossom, Gainor, McIntosh, and Williams, First Vice Presidents, Federal Governors Board of Governors Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Minneapolis, Boston, and San Francisco respectively -2- Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, Bums, Eisenmenger, J. Davis, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Philadelphia, Dallas, Boston, and Cleveland, respectively Messrs. Cox, Davenport, and T.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is merely a disclaimer and introductory note about the transcript.


Passage number 2.
 Davis, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Minneapolis, and Kansas City respectively Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of April 21, 1979 MR. ALTMA”. Good morning. This is Murray Altmann in the Board Room. [Secretary’s note: Mr. Altmann called the roll to determine whether all Reserve Banks were connected and the attendance at each Bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It simply states the names and positions of individuals participating in a conference call.


Passage number 3.
] CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right, you are all on. This is the process of consultation following [our practice] in recent months when we’ve had variations in the growth of the money aggregates from expectations. Our consultations in the past have involved circumstances where money growth was weaker than expected and we have wanted to he sure that we had an accord in the Committee before deciding on the continuing instructions to the Desk. This time the money aggregates are growing more strongly than had been anticipated, so we also would like to get your sense of how we should proceed. Let us start off first by looking briefly at what is happening in the economy to see what new data or updated data we have that would guide us. Jim Kichline is here to give us a brief review.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a process of consultation and gathering information in order to make a decision.


Passage number 4.
 MR. KICHLINE. Since the last Committee meeting the Commerce Department has published its first preliminary estimate of GNP, which shows real GNP growth of about 3/4 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter. The rate of increase in the gross business product deflator was estimated at about 9-3/4 percent at an annual rate. Both numbers were about a half percentage point less than the staff had estimated. They still are subject to considerable revision, and various hints of what may happen [to individual components] suggest some upward and some downward revisions. Overall at this point we don’t have additional new information that would suggest to us the direction ultimately of a significant change. We have received a couple of pieces of new information that seem significant. One is the new orders figures for March, which showed that total durable goods orders in March declined appreciably, although for the quarter as a whole they remained considerably above, on average, the level that prevailed in the fourth quarter of 1978. Nondefense capital goods orders declined 4.3 percent, which is a large decline; a good deal of it was attributable to the volatile aircraft sector. However, machinery orders, which seem to be a reasonable indicator of the underlying trend in capital goods orders, were down in both March and in the preceding month. We believe these numbers are consistent with the staff‘s forecast, and at this point they would suggest some slowing in the rate of increase in business investment later in the year. The consumer price index was released yesterday and showed a rate of increase of 1 percent for the month of March. Once again food and energy prices were quite high, but the increases were widespread throughout all sectors. The one possible helpful hint there is that the rate of increase of food prices was down from the very high pace in February. Other information also suggests that we may get some relief later this year from the sizable increases in food prices. 4/21/19 2 One other final piece of information would be on new auto sales. For the first 20 days of April they were running at 8-3/4 million units, which is about 112 million below the very high level in March. On average we would judge that the auto market remains quite strong. That’s all I have, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mostly consists of factual information and observations.


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Jim. Let’s continue with the briefings before we come back to any questions. I would ask Steve Axilrod to comment on the aggregates numbers themselves. M R .  AXILROD. Thank you hk. Chairman. The Committee had a target rate of growth for M1 for the two-month April-May period of 4 to 8 percent, and for M2 a 4 to 8-1/2 percent target rate. We are currently estimating for the April-May period for M1 a growth rate of 8-314 percent, which would be 314 of a point above the upper end of the range. That [reflects] an April growth rate of around 17-112 percent because of the recent sharp rates of growth in the weeks of April 1 lth and April 18th that we just published and the preliminary unpublished data for April 25th that show a further increase of $1.2 billion. That’s after the $4 billion rise in the April 18th week and we have assumed a fairly noticeable decline in subsequent weeks. So on the assumption that the level of M1 at the end of May will be about $2 billion lower than it is at the end of April, we would have a zero rate of growth in May. We believe that there are special factors in the April figure that make it reasonable to assume a decline in the level of M1 following this late April [period]. There seems to be evidence that the Treasury is accelerating refunds because of some laggardness earlier and also accelerating them so rapidly that it may be getting [funds] out that would ordinarily have gone out in May. Secondly, there is evidence that the Treasury had delayed collecting checks that had been sent in by people to pay income taxes. That, of course, would have left more money in private demand deposits waiting for collection by the Treasury as the days have been going by in late April. Our staff has estimated the effect of these special factors to be on the order of, say, 7 to 9 percentage points in April. The ATS shift, by the way, was worth about 2.8 percentage points at an annual rate in April. So if you added that to the 17.4 percent, growth [in Ml] would be at a 20.2 percent rate for that month. Time deposits as well are running relatively strong and for M2 we’re estimating growth for the two-month April-May period at 8-112 percent-- the top of the Committee‘s range--with April estimated at 13-1/4 percent and May estimated at 3- 1/2 percent. Very quickly, Mr. Chairman, I think there are two other points that ought to be brought to the Committee’s attention. The bank credit figures have been revised-it’s a benchmark revision--by the staff. They’ve been revised upward for the last half of ’78 and the first quarter of ’79. Formerly, in the first quarter of 1979, bank credit rose 11.2 percent; on the revised basis it’s 12.8 percent. Business loans had been up 17.6 percent; on the revised basis it’s19.5 percent, though still showing the pattern of a high January, low February, and an even lower March. Data for April suggest a very strong rebound in bank credit. But this too, like the [behavior of] M1, is related to some extent to the high tax payments that are occurring. 4/27/79 3 Then finally, Mr. Chairman, on the market, short-term rates have dropped since the Committee meeting because the market had been expecting a tightening and with the funds rate remaining unchanged short rates dropped. Also, there was the unwinding of the Treasury’s large cash management bill offering in early April. While short rates were dropping--though they did rise this morning because of the large M1 figure that was published for the week ending April 18th.- long rates rose. [That occurred] in part because the Treasury has announced a $4-114 billion refunding, with half of that going into the 30-year bond area and in part also because the corporate market was adversely affected by the bad publicity on public utilities and there were fairly large public utility offerings this week. In addition, rates have risen in the mortgage market, partly reflecting these corporate bond yields but also reflecting the weakening of inflows into thrift institutions. The [growth of] April inflows to S&Ls has been reduced to around 7 percent and the data for early April suggest a further weakening of inflows relative to what had happened in previous Aprils, and April ’78 was a weak period. So the evidence on the mortgage market is for fairly constricted growth in credit availability there. That’s all I have, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily providing information and analysis.


Passage number 6.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Peter Sternlight, are you on the line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is just asking for confirmation of whether Peter Sternlight is on the line or not. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 7.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes I am, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of agreement by Mr. Sternlight.


Passage number 8.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Before we turn to Committee members I’d just like to ask you for your comments on the market situation as you see it and any comments you would have on the directive as it now stands if we were not to give you new instructions. The directive now reads --as we all recall it was a money market directive--that with equal weight given to M1 and M 2  if the rates of growth appeared to be close to or beyond the upper or lower limits of the indicated ranges, the objective for the funds rate was to be raised or lowered in an orderly fashion within its range. So, Peter, could you just give us your comments on how you see market conditions now and how you would interpret this directive unless we give you any additional [instructions].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for comments and interpretation on the market situation and the directive.


Passage number 9.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. As for market conditions, I don’t think I’d have anything significant to add to what Steve has given. I’d perhaps just note one thing--that, as he said, the longer end of the market has been heavy and I would think that’s in part also because inflation expectations are continuing quite strong. Also, and this is very hard to quantify, I think there is a bit of disappointment in the market that there wasn’t a firming after the last meeting that participants in the long market could have interpreted as a strengthening of System intentions to get a grip on inflation. But, as I say, I don’t know how much to make of that factor. As for the federal funds rate, in the last full week that has averaged 10.09 percent; in the previous couple of weeks it was just a shade under 10 percent. We have, of course, been continuing to aim in the 10 to 10-1/8 percent range. On your question about what the Desk would be aiming for in the absence of new instructions, it seems to me that the strength in the aggregates is such as to call for a response from the Desk. And it appears to me that something on the order of a 10-1/4 percent funds rate would be about what I would be recommending in light of the performance of the aggregates. 4/27/19 4 The other factor I want to call to the Committee’s attention is the delicate timing that we face now because of the Treasury funding that Steve also referred to. The Treasury announced the 10-year and 30-year auctions that are coming up on next Tuesday and Wednesday. If there were to be any adjustment to our funds rate objective, I think it would be important to make that intention clear to the market today if possible and Monday so that market participants could bid in [those auctions with] some reasonable knowledge of where policy is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 10.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Peter. I’m going to suggest that at this time I go down the roll--first of the voting members of the Committee and then the other Presidents or their representatives--and ask for your views, in light of these circumstances, on what our posture should be. If you have any specific questions on the information provided by the staff we would welcome those, but I hope the situation is clear enough that we can just get your advice on what you personally would recommend at this time. Let’s start alphabetically with Bob Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any assertion or disagreement. It is a request for input or advice from the individual mentioned.


Passage number 11.
 MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, this looks like another case where the aggregates have gone through their usual April acrobatics and I don’t think we really ought to be so surprised by it. These deposit shifts that have been incident to the tax payments and refunds seem to defy all our efforts to get a statistically reliable seasonal factor. So I don’t think we ought to attach a great deal of weight to these April figures, particularly in view of the 7 to 9 points that Steve mentioned a while ago was the extra [estimated effect]. I’d be inclined to wait to see if we get some unwinding in early May. And even if we didn’t, we still wouldn’t have gotten above the 1-112 percent growth target we set. So I think we’re okay at this point and I would hold off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a cautious approach based on their assessment of the situation. They do not reference any opposing views or engage in a debate with others.


Passage number 12.
 CHAIRMAN MILIER. Thank you, Bob. Phil Coldwell. I hope you’re on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is thanking Bob and introducing themselves as Phil Coldwell.


Passage number 13.
 MR. COLDWELL. I am, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Coldwell's response to the chairman without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 14.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I’m sorry you missed part of the discussion earlier but I think you know the facts and the background in any case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker acknowledges that the recipient missed part of a discussion earlier but expresses confidence that they still have knowledge of the facts and background. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 15.
 MR. COLDWELL. I knew all of the background. I didn’t miss much anyway. I have one comment. As I understand it, Steve, you’re talking 17.5 percent M1 growth for April and last year as I recall we knocked 6 percentage points off in our seasonal adjustment revision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Coldwell is simply stating that he is aware of the background information and offering a comment regarding the M1 growth percentage.


Passage number 16.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 17.
 MR. COLDWELL. So if this were last year we’d be looking at 23 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a factual statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 18.
 MR. AXILROD. Well, we’d be looking at 26 percent with the ATS effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or a statistic.


Passage number 19.
 MR. COLDWELL. Either one is exceptionally high. I must admit that this is another April package but on general grounds, and more particularly the continuing high rate of 4/21/19 5 inflation, I would permit the directive to be exercised as it is written, raising the fed funds rate to 10-114 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Coldwell, is stating his agreement with raising the fed funds rate to 10-11.4 percent due to the continuing high rate of inflation. There is no indication of disagreement or differing opinions in this statement.


Passage number 20.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Phil. Bob Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, in this case, is expressing gratitude towards Phil.


Passage number 21.
 MR. MAYO. I’d leave it the way it is, Mr. Chairman. The economic prospects seem, if anything, a little more sluggish to me than they were when we met in April and I consider that more important than what Bob Black has called the April acrobatics. I have no faith in so short term a movement; if it continues for 3 or 4 weeks like that, I’ll eat those words but not for now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Mayo, is expressing his opinion about the economic prospects and stating that he considers them more important than other short-term movements.


Passage number 22.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Chuck Partee. h4R. PARTJ3E. Well, we have been looking at the figure moving up for the last three weeks, Bob, and it is pretty high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain a clear contention or disagreement. It simply states an observation about a figure that has been increasing.


Passage number 23.
 MR. MAYO. I need three more weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Mayo needs three more weeks.


Passage number 24.
 MR. PARTEE. As I look at the M1 number, it appears that we are going to have a two-month average here that’s very high. It seems to me that the staff estimate for May is making full allowance for the oddities of the April figure and, therefore, we will have an 8 percent or thereabouts increase for the two months and it could be considerably more. I’m also impressed by the strength of the bank credit numbers--both the revision and the April bank loan numbers at the large banks--which seem to me to put us back more on the track [prevailing] early in the year than in March. And finally, I’m impressed by Peter’s argument on the Treasury financing. These are long-term issues and I think if there is a prospect of [our] moving, that we ought to signal it before those auctions because it’s not just a standard financing in my view when they’re going to be selling a 30-year bond. So I guess I would proceed to follow along the directive as written and do what Peter suggested--raise the funds rate to 10-1/4 percent with the idea that if the strength holds up we’ll move up further in the range in a couple of weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing agreement with the staff estimate, the strength of the bank credit numbers, and Peter's argument on Treasury financing. He is suggesting moving forward with raising the funds rate according to the directive.


Passage number 25.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Chuck and Nancy.


Passage number 26.
 MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I would agree with Bob Mayo and Bob Black. I think that we have a great deal of difficulty with our money supply numbers in April. And I, too, am impressed by the weakness that’s been showing up in the first-quarter numbers. We’re considerably below where we thought we were when the FOMC [last] met. If I’m wrong and [the strong money growth] continues, I can change my mind later. But I don’t think we should change from the funds rate of approximately 10-1/8 percent at the present time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is expressing agreement with Bob Mayo and Bob Black's assessment of the situation and shares their concerns about the money supply numbers and the weakness in the first-quarter numbers. She also states that if the strong money growth continues, she is open to changing her mind later.


Passage number 27.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy. Paul Volcker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 28.
 MR. VOLCKER. Let me just say, so far as the aggregates are concerned, Mr. Chairman, that while apparently the staff up here doesn’t depart from the general outline of what 4I21l19 6 Steve reported, they do have substantially higher numbers for May than the zero that Steve has for M1 growth. In other words, they [estimate growth will be] down but not down that far, which would give us a two-month figure somewhere above Steve’s projections. I don’t know how much this is worth but [our staffs estimates] are all off in that direction. And, of course, we’ve got these other numbers like the NOWs and ATS accounts and money market mutual funds continuing to rise. So I think we do have a pretty big bulge here, despite the complications of the tax date. In general, as you know, I thought we should have been a little tighter before so I’m not disinclined to following the directive. That seems to be a minimal [step]; I would associate myself with Mr. Coldwell and Mr. Partee in that regard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Volcker is simply stating that the staff's estimates for May's M1 growth are higher than Steve's projection, suggesting that there may be a small difference in their calculations. However, Mr. Volcker agrees with the directive to tighten monetary policy and aligns himself with Mr. Coldwell and Mr. Partee's views.


Passage number 29.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Paul. Henry Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply includes a statement of gratitude from one person, Paul, to another person, Henry Wallich.


Passage number 30.
 MR. WALLICH. Well, I would not give a great deal of weight to these aggregates; they are only marginally above our ranges. On the other hand, as I look at the economy I see inflation expectations clearly worsening in the face of some straws on the down side in the real sector. I’m impressed by the evidence on the inflation expectations in the rise in long rates and the declines simultaneously in short rates, which both are in the wrong direction. I’ve been in favor of a higher funds rate previously and I would think that the minimum we ought to do now is to go to 10-1/4 percent. But my preference would be for [going] somewhat higher [on the funds rate] and if that could be done later, I would regard that as right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is expressing his own opinion and perspective on the economy and inflation expectations. He acknowledges some negative factors in the real sector but believes that raising the funds rate would be a step in the right direction. There is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 31.
 CHAIRMAN MILER. Thank you, Henry. At least that’s a sign of consistency; you weren’t paying attention to the aggregates before and you’re still not. I think that’s a good move. At least it shows [consistency].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges that the person being referred to, Henry, has consistently not paid attention to the aggregates. The speaker is expressing approval of this consistency.


Passage number 32.
 MR. WALLICH. Even with conditions changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing a situation where conditions have changed.


Passage number 33.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I realize that and I commend you for sticking with your guns because that’s the point you made at the last meeting, as I recall. Now we have Roger Guffey, who is the alternate for John Balks, as I understand it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging and praising the listener for remaining consistent in their viewpoint, and then providing additional information about Roger Guffey.


Passage number 34.
 MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would be inclined to join Bob Black and Bob Mayo, particularly in view of the fact that we have experienced six months of very slow [economic] growth. In fact, [given] the experience in April of the last few years, I’d like to wait and get some additional information on [the aggregates]. As a result I would like to stay where we are for at least two more weeks and perhaps take a look at it [then]. The aggregates are obviously a matter of concern but they jump around so much that I’m not prepared to recommend going up [on the funds rate].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The speaker expresses their agreement with Bob Black and Bob Mayo and provides reasons for their agreement. They also express their concern about the aggregates, but do not present any disagreement or contention with the other speakers or their views.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Roger. Next we have Larry Roos who is the alternate for Monroe Kimbrel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the order of individuals being called upon to speak.


Passage number 36.
 4/27/79 I MR. ROOS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have always previously paid attention to the aggregates and still do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker has always paid attention to the aggregates and still does.


Passage number 37.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Another consistent one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any actual passage provided. Please provide the passage in question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
 MR. ROOS. As you recall, prior to this surge in the aggregates, I spoke out at the last meeting for some ease because of my concern about the undershooting of the [MI] range. I do think that we should take it seriously, even though we don’t know whether the present surge is temporary or not. There is some historical perspective. Last year at this time of the year the aggregates did surge upward and they then remained at a fairly level but higher [rate of growth] for a period of time, so I don’t think we can ignore this. I would recommend that the Desk be authorized to use the full 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent range for the fed funds target and be prepared to permit the fed funds rate to move upward toward 10-1/2 percent in an orderly fashion. If this surge in the aggregates is temporary, then we can permit it once again to fall toward 10 [or even] 9.314 percent. So I think we ought to broaden the fed funds [movement] and use the full range and be flexible as we see how permanent the present surge turns out to be. CHARMAN MILLER. Larry, I commend you for also being consistent in watching the aggregates. But I’m not sure I understood what you thought the instructions should be to the Desk or what the interpretation should be today as distinguished from over the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Roos recommends using the full range for the fed funds target and being flexible depending on the permanency of the surge in aggregates. However, Chairman Miller expresses uncertainty and confusion about Mr. Roos's recommendations, indicating a disagreement or lack of agreement between the two.


Passage number 39.
 MR. ROOS. Well, ideally, I would like to see us say to the Desk that it should move [the funds rate] up to 10-1/2 percent if on the basis of its judgment it sees fit to do so. Realistically, I would say that to proceed in an orderly way we should move to 10-1/4 percent as quickly as possible and [subsequently] move it higher. And if the fed funds rate does continue to move upward, Mr. Chairman, I think some consideration should be given to an increase in the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting two options, one ideal and one realistic, for raising the funds rate and suggesting that consideration should be given to increasing the discount rate. However, there is no explicit disagreement or debate present.


Passage number 40.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let me go on. I hope Ernie Baughman is now on the line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses their hope that Ernie Baughman is present on the line.


Passage number 41.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. I have just come on, Mr. Chairman, so I am not privy to very much of the preceding discussion. My inclination would be that in the circumstances the federal funds rate should be edged up and the record when it becomes public should show that we were resisting at least to some extent a surge in the growth rate of the monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Instead, it presents the speaker's personal inclination and suggests that they believe the federal funds rate should be increased in order to resist a surge in the growth rate of the monetary aggregates.


Passage number 42.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Ernie. Willis Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 43.
 MR. WL”. Mr. Chairman, I think I would join with the group that would like to see a little more [evidence] in the behavior [of the aggregates] before we move. I would be inclined if we want to indicate concern in this area to do it through the discount rate rather than the federal funds rate at this time. We resisted [making a move] when [the deviation from our target was] was on the down side and it seems to me that we don’t have enough evidence yet on the up side to make a change in our operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses their opinion on how to handle the situation, suggesting using the discount rate instead of the federal funds rate and cautioning against making a change in operations without sufficient evidence.


Passage number 44.
 4I21l19 8 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Willis. Frank Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but the passage provided does not contain enough information for me to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 45.
 MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I still believe that the economy is in a peaking process and I believe that the aggregates have to be viewed in the light of what has been going on in the past six months. Even with this bulge, M2 has only grown at a 4 percent rate in the past six months, so at the moment I would not make any change. If this strength should be sustained into May then I think we would have to move against it. But at the moment I would do nothing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is expressing his personal belief and perspective on the state of the economy, but there is no clear contention or disagreement with any other person or viewpoint in the passage.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Frank. Dave Eastbum. I hope Philadelphia is still with us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple expression of gratitude and a statement of hope.


Passage number 47.
 MR. EASTBURN. Yes, I’m on. I would hold where we are at the present time. Judging by last year’s experience, as Larry pointed out, following an April surge May and June were still relatively high. If that happens again, I think perhaps we should take action. But I think we need to watch that and I wouldn’t take the action right away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Eastburn is expressing his opinion and suggesting a cautious approach, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 48.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Dave. We have Kyle Fossum on for Monroe Kimbrel. So, Kyle, we’ll hear from you. M R .  FOSSUM. It’s a close call for us but we come down on the side of holding where we are and viewing [developments] for another week or so before we would suggest changing. I would report, though, that in a conference call with our Bank‘s executive committee this morning the discount rate was discussed and there was some inclination to snug it up a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fossum, mentions that there was some inclination to snug up the discount rate, suggesting a disagreement within the executive committee.


Passage number 49.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Kyle. We have Tom Gainor on for Mark Willes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing appreciation and introducing the guest.


Passage number 50.
 MR. GAINOR. Mr. Chairman, we would favor no change. We’d like to see two or three more weeks to test whether the April figures are significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any opposing views or conflicting opinions. It simply states that Mr. Gainor would like more time to test the April figures, without indicating any disagreement on this matter.


Passage number 51.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Tom. John Williams for John Balks. M R .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 52.
  WILLIAMS. We would agree with Frank Morris. We’d be strongly opposed at this time to any [increase] in the federal funds rate. We think that April is not the month that we want to respond to, particularly if the data are on the high side--April being not a typical month and also a very unreliable month. So until we get further confirmation of this upsurge in the aggregates, we think it would be very premature to move. We would recommend waiting until the May data come in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with Frank Morris and explaining their opposition to increasing the federal funds rate in April. They suggest waiting for further confirmation and recommend waiting until the May data to make a decision.


Passage number 53.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, thank you all very much. It shows you that I was right at the last meeting when I said it would take a month before we get to be unanimous. We haven’t reached [unanimity] yet. It’s a very interesting situation. Without my vote we have five of 4/21/79 9 the voting members who would prefer moving up to 10-1/4 percent and four who would like to stand pat. Of the nonvoting members we have six who would like to stand pat and one who would edge [the funds rate] up. It’s an amazing dispersion and leaves us with a circumstance that is not very appealing. After listening, and recognizing all of the risks and difficulties, on balance I think I would tend to encourage the Desk to follow the directive that we have and therefore to tighten up a bit. I would like to suggest, because with this dispersion I don’t think an official vote does us all much good, that we merely view this consultation as a consultation involving advice and [guidance] on how the Desk should act. I hope that will be agreeable to everyone because this is a close one to call. I think everyone had a persuasive argument on both sides [but] the differences in terms of what really will be done are fairly narrow. And that being so, my tendency would be to follow the directive as we’ve written it, which the Desk would interpret as meaning they should be moving [the funds rate] up to 10-114 percent. Let me just run through [my list] quickly to see if anyone objects to that procedure or that conclusion. Bob Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion of different opinions and the speaker's own tendency to follow a directive.


Passage number 54.
 MR. BLACK. It’s fine with me, Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 55.
 Chairman CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil Coldwell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The passage only provides information about Chairman Phil Coldwell.


Passage number 56.
 MR. COLDWELL. Fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 57.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 58.
 MR. MAYO. Fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply states "Fine" as a response, which does not suggest any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 59.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 60.
 MR. PARTEE. It’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that "it's fine," suggesting that there is no issue or disagreement.


Passage number 61.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I have provided an explanation for the passage or question, but there is no identifiable passage or question mentioned. Please provide the passage or question you would like me to analyze for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 62.
 MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context. The provided text, "MS. TEETERS," does not provide any information regarding the content or subject of the passage.


Passage number 63.
 It’s all right CHAIRMAN MILLER. Paul Volcker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It's all right" indicates agreement or approval.


Passage number 64.
 MR. VOLCKER. Seems to me highly appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states the opinion of Mr. Volcker.


Passage number 65.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Henry Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 66.
 MR. WALLICH. Seems fine to me but we should look again as the data evolve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich states that everything seems fine to him but suggests the need to keep an eye on the evolving data, indicating a cautious approach rather than disagreement.


Passage number 67.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. "Of course" is used to indicate agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 68.
 Roger Guffey MR.GUFFEY. Fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of any contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions a person named Roger Guffey and describes him as "fine."


Passage number 69.
 4/21/19 10 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 70.
 MR. ROOS. Fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that "Mr. Roos" is fine. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 71.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is because there is no context or information provided in the passage to determine if there is any contention or disagreement involving Chairman Miller.


Passage number 72.
 Ernie Baughman MR. BAUGHMAN. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they agree with Ernie Baughman.


Passage number 73.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Willis Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without the actual passage. Please provide the complete text for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 74.
 MR.WwN. Yes. CHAIMAN MILLER. Frank Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 75.
 MR. MORRIS. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it simply presents a response or acknowledgement by Mr. Morris.


Passage number 76.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Dave Eastbum. M R .  EASTBURN. I guess it’s all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I guess it's all right" suggests neutrality or an acceptance of the situation.


Passage number 77.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Kyle Fossum. M R .  FOSSUM. Fine with us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the person named Kyle Fossum is fine with whatever is being discussed.


Passage number 78.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Tom Gainor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: To determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage, we need the passage itself. Please provide the passage so that it can be analyzed for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 79.
 MR. GAINOR. Fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that "MR. GAINOR" is fine without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 80.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Miller without providing any additional information or context.


Passage number 81.
 John Williams MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no information or content in the given passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 82.
 WILLIAMS. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply responds with "Okay" to indicate agreement or acceptance.


