Federal Open Market CommitteeConference CallJanuary 18, 1985PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMs. SegerMr. WallichMessrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Timlen,Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Guffey and Morris, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City andBoston, respectivelyMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Mr. Kohn, Associate EconomistMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Board, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call Held onJanuary 18, 1985CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible], but certainly the sensewas that we were talking in that kind of time frame and that if therewere a pronounced tendency for the dollar to strengthen, it should becombated in a more or less concerted way. This would involve all theG-5 countries in one way or another in principle and might involvesome other European countries as well. So having in a sense agreed tothat approach, I thought we'd better review it with the Committeebefore we went any further. We haven't done anything but say we standnow prepared to do something. All this would be in conjunction withthe Treasury, as we have been operating, should the dollar strengthenappreciably this afternoon. On Monday the New York market will beclosed, so this probably won't be operational for us on Monday unlessthere are some fringe markets. But on Tuesday or Wednesday, let'ssay, if the dollar strengthened appreciably, we would be prepared tooperate potentially--not necessarily, but potentially--in greater sizethan we have operated for some time. There is no precise indicationof size but I mention that because we've tended to do little dribbleswhen we have [intervened] recently and this might be a bit more than alittle dribble if the need were such.I don't think there's any need for any operational decisionin terms of directives or limits. We have adequate limits of varioussorts for the moment. I don't think it's inconceivable that we wouldrun through some of these limits if the dollar were really strong, butwe're not in any imminent danger of doing that. That, of course,would be a point for further review. I don't know whether Mr. Crossor Mr. Truman have those limits more closely in mind. They might runthrough those for us; and Mr. Cross in any event can give us a littlesummary of what has been happening in the exchange markets recently.Why don't we start with the limits? Do Mr. Truman or Mr. Cross havethem more firmly in mind?MR. TRUMAN. I think we both do. Why doesn't Sam do both,and then we will only listen to one voice.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Go ahead, Sam. We probably don't have NewYork [on the line].SPEAKER(?). Who do we have on this call?MR. BOEHNE. Philadelphia just came on late.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have anybody else?MR. FORRESTAL. Atlanta's here.MR. KEEHN. On in Chicago.MR. BOYKIN. Here in Dallas.MR. BALLES. San Francisco.MR. GUFFEY. Kansas City's on.MR. BERNARD. Boston should be on.1/18/85 -2-MR. CROSS. Can you hear New York? New York is on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where have you been?MR. CORRIGAN. Where have you been, Sam?MR. CROSS. We've been on for about the past five minutes butno one could hear me. Can you hear me now?SEVERAL. Yes.MR. CROSS. All right. Let me proceed. [The overall limit]on balances for all currencies as you recall is $6-1/2 billion, and wehave available under that overall limit $1-1/2 billion. So we're verycomfortable there. This is broken down into [informal limits on]deutschemarks, yen, and other currencies. The other currencies[category] would be relevant if we were to intervene in other than theDM or the yen, namely in sterling. We have available under thatlimitation $167 million at the present time. So, our authorizedbalances are not in danger of being breached at this moment.With respect to the market, let me give you a little rundown:Immediately prior to the time Secretary Regan spoke yesterday, whichwas very late in the course of our day--our markets were closing--thedollar was cruising around 3.175 marks. The other currencies hadmoved more or less similarly vis-a-vis the mark. After his statement,there was an initial fallback in the dollar in the South Pacific andother markets that were open; it fell back about 2 pfennigs. Butafter hitting these lower levels and when the Far East became moreactive, there were buyers for dollars at these lower levels and thatseemed to cover professionals and speculators. We heard the usual--that speculative operators were in there, namely the Russians andSouth Africans and so forth. As a result of all this, the dollar thenrose again somewhat and opened in Europe at about 3.165 marks. Duringthe course of the European day the dollar was fairly quiet. It justbarely touched 3.18 marks once or twice but generally speaking was inthe 3.17 to 3.175 range during Europe's day. Since I've been sittinghere the dollar does seem to be rising and has now gone up above the3.18 level; it's getting close to 3.185.The attitude towards Secretary Regan's statement seems tovary considerably among the various market participants. A number ofthem called attention to the fact that it was cited as a reaffirmationof the Williamsburg agreements, and they tend to think that that makesit likely not to be of major significance--that it might be somethingto placate the Europeans. But there are a number of people who haveread the Regan statement as reflecting the possibility, certainly, ofsomething aimed at communicating more than that. And the market iswary. They read the comments that there may be some surprises andthat we might operate on occasions when it would be helpful and notjust [to counter] disorderly market pressures as in the past. So,there is a general wariness and uneasiness. And there is somelikelihood that the market, either in the course of today orrelatively soon, will try to test some of these [intervention] pointsand get a better understanding of the meaning of the Group of 5statement. As of now, that's the general picture. I think very fewpeople believe that it reflects any fundamental modification of our1/18/85policy. But there are quite a few who think that it may have somesignificance and they are rather wary because of that. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The significance of this phrase that Mr.Cross used about being helpful--I don't remember the exact words, butthe Williamsburg Communique said something to the effect that we wereall prepared to intervene when it was mutually agreed that it would behelpful. That is a nice diplomatic formulation of saying one willintervene when everybody agrees. And that's the wording that was usedto some degree yesterday. I guess the conclusion yesterday was thatit was a mutual agreement that it might [not] be helpful if the dollarstrengthened appreciably at this point. So, that's where we are. Andif it's strengthening enough now it may become operational today.MR. PARTEE. Paul, was there any view about the pound? Wasthat looked at separately?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there was some discussion of thatand I think it was in this context: that if you could imagine a poundproblem really insulated from this and not accompanied by the generalstrengthening of the dollar, this doesn't apply.MR. PARTEE. It does not apply?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that particular circumstance, I thinkit's fair to say that it was not thought to be likely. One couldenvisage a situation in which the pound was weaker than the othersfairly easily, but there is a general movement that leaves a littlehaziness around it. But it's not operational so far as we'reconcerned. Now, the British might want to do something specificallydirected at sterling.MR. PARTEE. Well, I suppose it's conceivable that we mightwant to do intervention in sterling rather than in marks. We haven'tfor a long time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The amount of sterling intervention wehave done that has not been part of a swap arrangement or somethinglike that is nil, or close to nil, historically. The general thoughthere is that, if and when we operate, it would be unlikely to be insterling alone. It would more likely be in the mark alone than insterling alone. But it might well be in both or in mark, sterling,and yen.MR. RICE. Why not in sterling?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether you heard it, but thequestion was rather quietly put by Governor Rice: Why not in sterlingalone? I don't exclude it entirely on any particular day. We're alittle chary of getting into the business of wanting to supportsterling specifically.MR. RICE. That's where the need is greatest, is it not?SPEAKER(?). We can't hear those comments.MR. RICE. I said sterling is where the need seems to begreatest at the present time.1/18/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think in one sense that is true.But it raises the question of sterling weakness rather than dollarstrength; we have intervened in the mark or the yen on the basis ofthose being the other two leading world currencies and we're dealingwith the general relationship of European currencies to the dollar.When one is dealing in sterling I don't think it has that implication,and I'm not sure we want to foster an implication that we areparticularly concerned with a sterling support operation as opposed toa more general problem.MR. PARTEE. So that's the context in which Sam says that$167 million leeway in sterling seems sufficient.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have to understand about all thesefigures that we're in this with the Treasury, so any buying that we dofor our own account is multiplied by two in terms of what we do in themarket.MR. PARTEE. That's the understanding: that we and they willshare?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. If the market pressures got strongenough--. Let me put it this way: I hope that we don't do anoperation doomed to be ineffectual by its niggardly nature, which iswhat we've been doing recently. So, while I don't particularly expectit, I don't consider it inconceivable that we might end up with anamount of currencies that would involve raising the question ofchanging some of these informal limits.MR. MARTIN. But the phrase "concentrated intervention," Mr.Chairman, implies that the Japanese and the Germans would beintervening along with us, right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Concerted" not "concentrated."MR. MARTIN. Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we all will be intervening in our ownmarkets, so the amount and timing of any intervention wouldn't besimultaneous necessarily. It could be simultaneous when the [hours ofoperation of the] markets overlap, but there was a clear understandingthat if the development of the strength in the dollar was pronouncedin Europe, they would intervene. We wouldn't do anything if it's inthe European market; we both might be intervening if both markets wereopen. Let's take today, for example: the European markets are nowclosed and ours is open. We would be intervening alone today simplybecause we are the market in which the dollar's strength developed.But it's against this clear background that they would pick it up ifit continued strong on Monday in Europe. They wouldn't do anything inEurope if the dollar weakened. And as I said, there's no specifictime limit on this operation, but nobody is talking about a commitmenthere for months. Basically, we're talking in the context of the nextweek; and then we'll see what happens.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Forrestal. I'dlike to ask this question: What do you sense, from your talks, is thespecific strategy or the objective over the next two or three weeks or1/18/85whatever it might be--to hold the dollar at a prearranged level oractually to bring the dollar down, say, below 3.17 deutschemarks?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Neither. I think everybody would berelatively content, or more than relatively content, if the net resultwith intervention or without intervention was that the dollar ended upsomewhat lower than it has been. But we were quite clear that we didnot want to make this operation an overt "drive-the-dollar-downoperation"--that it was U.S. policy to get the dollar down and that wewere going to drive it down by pushing on a declining dollaroperationally. People certainly would be happy about not seeing thedollar go up, and they will intervene as it goes up, but there is nofixed target. If the strength is great enough, it will go up; and I'msure there is a hope that [unintelligible]. First of all, there is ahope that maybe with the announcement and with normal marketdevelopments it won't go up at all and that maybe there won't be anyintervention. If there is, I'm sure there is some hope that thedisplay of the announcement and the intervention will result in thedollar not going up. But there's nothing magic about a particularnumber.MR. PARTEE. Well, I'm no great supporter of intervention asyou know, but I do think the situation has become extreme enough thatit is called for. I think it's a good move.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the absence of other comments, I willassume that there is no pronounced objection. I don't think we haveto--though we may well want to--put in the record that we had thisconsultation. It's perfectly natural, considering the decisions thatwere taken [by the G-5]. But I don't think we're going to make anydecisions, because I think it is all in accordance with our operatingdirective and so forth.While I have you all, if anybody has any comments or burningquestions about the domestic scene or operations you can make acomment or raise a question. Operationally, of course, with all thefluctuations and misses and near misses that we have had, we'reoperating basically the same as we did when we came out of the OpenMarket Committee meeting, however many weeks ago that was. You knowwhat the money supply figures are; they're stronger than anticipatedby and large. But at least so far as M1 is concerned I think at thispoint it is clearly stronger but not extremely stronger; M2 and M3 arestrong. As for the economy, some of the economic news is on thefirmer side and you all know that. I don't know what other comments Iought to make. Hearing none from you, I will call the proceeding toan end. Thank you all.END OF SESSION