Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 4-5, 1985A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Monday, November 4, 1985, at 3:00 p.m. and continuingon Tuesday, November 5, 1985, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanBallesBlackForrestalKeehnMartinParteeRiceSegerMr. Guffey, Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield. 1/ General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Broaddus, Kohn, Lindsey, Prell, Scheld,Siegman, and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes of meeting held onOctober 1, 1985.11/4-5/85Mr. Coyne, 1/ Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, 2/ Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel,3/ Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, 3/ Deputy Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill,2/ Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Hooper, 3/ Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, 3/ Economist, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang, Ms. Munnell,Messrs. Rolnick and Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland,Kansas City, Philadelphia, Boston, Minneapolis, andDallas, respectivelyMr. Judd, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofSan FranciscoMs. Walter, Adviser, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New York1/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes of meeting held onOctober 1, 1985.2/ Attended Tuesday session only.3/ Attended Monday session only.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofNovember 4-5, 1985November 4, 1985--Afternoon Session[Secretary's Note: The beginning of this meeting, whichconsisted of the Committee's action to approve the minutes of theprevious meeting and a special staff presentation and discussion ofeconomic and policy implications of exchange rate adjustments, was nottranscribed. The presentation, by Messrs. Axilrod, Hooper, Stockton,and Slifman, is included in the Appendix.]MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. RICE. Sam, what will the BIS do with the deposits ofmarks?MR. CROSS. They will deposit them in banks.MR. RICE. Where? In Germany?MR. CROSS. In German banks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In Germany?MR. CROSS. I think the idea is that the BundesbankSo Iassume that most of this will get back into Germany.MR. BOEHNE. You talked earlier about selling dollars inmarkets outside New York as well as in New York. My general sense isthat the extent to which you're intervening in markets overseas is agood bit more than has been the practice in recent years. I wonder ifyou could comment on the pros and cons of that and how you would judgethe effectiveness of being more active in markets in the Far East, forexample.MR. CROSS. Well, I think it can be helpful at times. Forexample, at times when the Japanese were intervening rather heavily inthe yen we were intervening in the Far East, kind of following theiraction, to keep some action with respect to the mark. It showedevidence of a somewhat coordinated approach. And since we hadn't donethat sort of thing very much, as you said, certainly in quite a while,that certainly can have an impact in the proper circumstances.MR. BOEHNE. Have you been as open in these markets as youare in New York? Is it as obvious to people in the market?MR. CROSS. It's certainly known. We have tried differentapproaches in our own market and elsewhere, at times operating throughagents, at times trying to operate as openly and as visibly as wecould--dealing with a whole bunch of banks at once--in order to makeclear to all the participants that we were there and that we wereacting in a firm way. But it depends on the particular circumstancesand the time of day and things of that sort.11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions? We have arecommendation to renew the swap arrangements.[Secretary's Note: Motions to renew the swap arrangementsand to ratify the transactions in foreign currencies were made,seconded, and approved without objection.]MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion?MR. BOEHNE. I have a question. You said November 15 is"drop-dead day" or whatever.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, "drop-dead day"--when they have to trotout some gimmick.MR. BOEHNE. Right. Are there gimmicks there that can beused?MR. STERNLIGHT. They did some disinvesting of trust funds afew days ahead of the normal schedule in order to make benefitspayments to Social Security and other pension recipients just in thelast couple of days--last Friday and today. Conceivably, they coulddo some disinvestment of trust funds even further ahead of time. Butthat's something they have talked about in their inner circlediscussions at Treasury but have no intention, as far as I know now,of doing. There was mention, I think, in one of the letters that wentup from Secretary Baker to the Congress about the possibility ofselling gold but they said that the Administration is totally setagainst doing something like that. There are probably half a dozenother things that are conceivable but that they have said they justdon't want to do.MR. PARTEE. Have they used up the Federal Financing Bank?MR. STERNLIGHT. It will be just about used up by the $3billion cash management bill that they announced early this afternoonand will carry through tomorrow. I think that will leave about $1billion.MR. MELZER. Peter, would you say that the somewhat firmerand more volatile funds rate is associated primarily with thisuncertainty surrounding the Treasury's financing requirements? Or arethere other factors that are operating now?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the firming of the funds rate has beenrather minuscule; it has changed from a 7.90 percent average to an 8percent average, approximately. It is conceivable that some of thechanging pattern had to do with low Treasury balances in the moneycenter banks, which may have put them under a little more pressure tobuy in the fed funds market, but I'm not sure it was verysignificantly that. I think it may have been more a carrying throughof the slight adjustment that had been made in our degree of borrowingpressure before the last meeting that was achieving its maturingeffect in the recent period.11/4-5/85MR. MELZER. Did the intervention activity create anydifficulty for implementing domestic--?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think so. We had a good handle onwhat it was. Typically, that takes place in terms of the actualreserve impact with a couple of days' lag, and we were totally on topof what was happening there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions? If not, we have toratify those transactions.MR. PARTEE. So moved.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We can go home unlessyou want to hear an economic report. Mr. Kichline are you prepared togive an economic report?MR. KICHLINE. Sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want to go home?MR. PARTEE. I think we ought to have Mr. Kichline's reportin the morning.MS. SEGER. I do too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll see you all in the morning.[Meeting recessed]11/4-5/85November 5, 1985--Morning SessionMR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments?MR. MELZER. Jim, in what kind of shape are inventories ingeneral?MR. KICHLINE. We think really quite good. Obviously, partof what is going on in the aggregate numbers is this auto story:stocks were run off substantially in the third quarter and are beingrebuilt now. As we go through the various sectors, in puttingtogether what we know, we think that inventories are about in line inthe aggregate, and in the forecast we just have them rising withsales. So they don't really run off any more and they don'tcontribute to growth; they're a neutral factor. There are a couple ofareas that I think are important. I have seen some figures for Sears,for example, which presumably is pretty close to the industry inplanning. They still feel that inventories are a little on the highside, are banking on decent Christmas spending, and expect that willtake care of it. But if indeed consumer spending turned out to be alittle weak, I would think retailers might not be very happy as theyenter the new year. Still, in that general merchandise area,particularly with respect to apparel and some soft goods, it dependson decent sales prospects coming along.MR. PARTEE. Jim, that is an extraordinarily low saving ratein the third quarter. Would you attribute that mainly to the surge incar sales and the credit associated with it, or what?MR. KICHLINE. Well, it is two things: one is the surge incar sales; the other is that income growth was weakening and consumerspending outside of autos was still pretty good--not that weak. Ifyou want to take a percentage point or so off for auto sales, youmight do that. But even so, what we have been looking at is fairlygood consumer spending and weakening real disposable income growth, sothat consumers really have been in a position of reducing their savingrate, borrowing a lot and so forth, to fund expenditures. So, I thinkit is more than autos.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We did a calculation on that pointthat is kind of interesting. It is not an entirely valid calculationbecause you can't hold everything else equal, but with that limitationit is a valid calculation. If you use a benchmark of, say, 5 to 6percent as the average for the preceding quarters and work off that,the combination of two things--the reduction in farm income and highernet interest payments by consumers--appears to be worth a little morethan a percentage point on the saving rate itself.MR. PARTEE. Higher net interest payments?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Net.MR. PARTEE. Oh, net interest; so, payments minus receipts.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The combination of both of thosethings. Again, given the limitation of the way you do your11/4-5/85 -5-arithmetic, farm income and interest payments are about a half a pointeach.MR. PARTEE. I assume farmers aren't spending any money?MR. BOEHNE. Some farmers are. Some farmers in New Jerseyand Pennsylvania and Delaware are going out to places like Iowa andbuying up machinery that is on the block out there cheap and haulingit back.MR. PARTEE. Hauling it back?MR. BOEHNE. Hauling it back. They are buying implementsthat might cost $50,000 to $60,0000 and picking them up for $15,000,$20,000, or $25,000. It is worth the trip out.MS. SEGER. That isn't recorded as consumer spending though,is it?MR. BOEHNE. No. But some farmers are spending. That's mypoint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anyone have any more comments on thebusiness scene?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I myself just can't see anything outthere that is going to get growth up into the 3 to 3-1/2 percent rangeas opposed to the 2 to 3 percent range. For a long time I thoughthousing could make the difference in terms of that marginalcontribution, but I can't see that now either. Looking across thesectors of the economy at this point, it is just awfully hard to findsources of marginal growth that would get us to a bit more respectablerange on a forecast basis. On top of that, the anecdotal reports thatI, at least, am getting from business people and directors and so on--for what they are worth--are distinctly on the sour side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. Looking around the District I find, much as is thecase for the national outlook, that the incoming data are notconclusive. I see no evidence of accumulating weakness nor signs ofstronger growth in the months ahead. The business investment picturehas come in consistently weaker than I had expected, both in theDistrict and of course nationally as well. But I wouldn't see achange in that outlook. Housing, which Jerry just spoke of, hasresponded to the lowering of interest rates with less strength than Iand many of us had expected, and that is in the District as well asnationally. The real question is with the consumer, and in ourDistrict retailers are encouraged about the Christmas season. Also,in talking to people in the business community I have noticed what Ithink is a change in attitude toward their formerly optimistic feelingthat the fiscal impasse might be resolved. I have long thought thatit probably would not but in that I differed with the businesscommunity that I talked to; they had been optimistic up until the lastcouple of months but I think now their view is that the fiscal impassewill remain an impasse. I am not sure that I can take the next stepand say how that will change their planning for the future, but Ithink there has been a distinct change in attitude there. I would say11/4-5/85that the business people I talk to continue to be guardedly hopefulabout efforts to reduce exchange rates. While they realize thedangers connected with an overly fast reduction of the exchange rate,I think they view what has happened perhaps as being maintainable.And if exchange rates were to back up, I think their reaction would bedisappointment and that might affect their future plans.My view of the economic outlook is about the same as thestaff's forecast--I don't know whether to describe that as moderateexpansion--in the next couple of quarters. As I look at the 2 to 3percent number, which may [turn out to] be closer to 2 percent, andask myself if that is a good or bad number to be looking at in theforecast, I am not sure I come to a conclusion. If I talk to mydirectors and others and look at the gaps in the economy, I see a lotof room to say it is not a good number. On the other hand, when Iremember the difficulty of reducing inflation and the high price wepaid, it looks better in that context.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Jim has given us a ritualistic comment thatthere has been no change in the forecast and I am going to give theritualistic response to that and say that there has been a change inthe forecast in a direction with which I concur--that is to say, it ismore realistic in that the numbers are down a few tenths for the nextfive quarters and unemployment is constant or creeping up a bit,depending on how well the forecast tracks. Like others, I [havereservations] about the assumption of the saving rate staying at alittle over 4 percent, but we explored that pretty thoroughly andthere is no point in going over that further. It is interesting thatthe forecast contains a shift in government spending in the fullemployment budget deficit sense, which should be a matter of someinterest with regard to what Jerry Corrigan has indicated as a verycautiously optimistic outlook with no sector particularly giving apush. It does not look as though [stimulus] is going to come from thefederal government sector. I am delighted to see the housing forecastrevised downward a little. I like that old joke about the people wholived in [unintelligible] and everybody knew everybody's story, sotheir stories were numbered. I am going to number my comments, so Iwill simply say "number 17" rather than make you listen to myritualistic housing comment. I warn you, however, that tightening ofcredit standards by lending institutions has yet to have its fulleffect and that is coming. That is down the road and I think it willbe in 1986 but that--in other words, "17."MR. PARTEE. Does that mean that you agree with the forecast?MR. MARTIN. No, I said "17" already, Chuck. That means Ithink it is a little too optimistic.MR. MORRIS. The tightening of lending standards doesn't seemto have hit the commercial construction market. How do you accountfor that?MR. MARTIN. No, I am talking about housing. I am talkingabout that 1.8 million housing figure and that $5.6 billionresidential spending number, neither of which we will ever reach.11/4-5/85MR. MORRIS. What I don't understand is why the lendinginstitutions are still lending for office buildings at the rate theyare. I don't quite comprehend.MS. SEGER. It's the lags.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I got the answer to that the otherday, Frank. We had the chairman of one of the largest commercialconstruction companies in the world into the bank for lunch and Iasked him that same question. I said "How come you're still buildingall these buildings in Dallas and so on?" He said; "It is very easy;the banks keep giving us the money. As long as they give us the moneywe will keep building."MR. MARTIN. The banks, the thrifts, the life insurancecompanies--MR. FORRESTAL. Why are the banks extending the money?MR. PARTEE. They don't have any other place to put it!MR. MARTIN. I think the reason is different. I think it isbecause there still is, from the '70s, the expectation that thoseoffice rents and that percentage lease income from the commercialproperty are going to increase with inflation down the road--in three,four years, whatever. I think that's built in. These people haveequity positions and they feel that the office rents and thepercentage returns off the commercial property will [provide a good]return. In conclusion, I don't think the major issue here is downsiderisk. Let me break another rule and say that I think this is acourageous forecast. I think the staff was willing to revise it in adownward direction and take the risk that they might be pessimistic.It has implications, of course, for our next round of discussion withregard to monetary policy. There is that assumption of somewhat lowerinterest rates over the 5- or 6-quarter period--a drop of 150 pointsin one case and 100 points in the fed funds rate in the other case.We have to consider whether the forecast results are appropriate--whether the monetary policy we adopt here is consonant with that 150basis points decline over this period of time. I think it's a goodforecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I can't bring in any great amountof optimism to this discussion. Our part of the country, I think itis fair to say, is pretty sluggish. It is uneven; it depends on whereyou happen to be sitting. We had an unemployment rate for Texas lastmonth of 8.1 percent, which is very unusual. The unemployment ratesin Louisiana and New Mexico are even higher. In the various sectorsof the economy, there is really not anything positive that seems to behappening. We continue to feel that the energy situation will remain[poor] even though there has been some firming in the price. We thinkthat is temporary and that the price will start sliding as we getthrough the winter. In our latest survey of our agricultural banks itis fairly obvious that the tone has changed and that some of thoseproblems now are starting to materialize. From that last survey, thedecline in land values now is estimated to be about 10 percent, whichdoesn't sound like all that much compared to what is happening in the11/4-5/85Midwest. But that is the first time that I have seen a number thatlarge from our respondents. The only thing that is really happening,and this was mentioned earlier, is in non-residential construction.We just had another major office building announced in Dallas byRepublic Corporation; it is going to be a 60- story building that theyare going to build with a developer--Vantage Company--and in theprocess they are going to reduce their occupancy costs; they havereally made a very nice scenario on how all that's going to work out.I was reading in the paper coming up on the plane yesterday thatPrudential, which now owns the second tallest building in Dallas, oneof the newer ones--InterFirst Tower II, which InterFirst sold--isgoing to spend $50 million putting a new facade on that building so itwill look prettier. I guess that is a good business decision; I don'tknow. But it just keeps on. We set new records in August in terms ofthe amount of commercial construction. Even in Houston--and I think Imentioned this before--there is a $250 million building coming out ofthe ground in downtown Houston. But that developer is going to catchthe curve right; he is going to come on stream just at the right time.I am inclined to agree with Pres in terms of the outlook 3 to 5 yearsout: that there still seems to be the conviction that you can catchthe turning point and it will pay off.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, the Sixth District is seeing adefinite tapering off of economic activity. Unemployment is upsomewhat. The same sectors that have been suffering over the lastseveral months are still in difficulty, basically textiles andapparel. Agriculture, while not as bad as in the Midwest, is still inthe doldrums, and energy is pretty bad. On the other hand, we havethis continuing activity in the commercial real estate sector, which Ifind very, very difficult to understand. I get the same answer thatother people get: They're going to continue to build as long as theyhave the money to do it; I guess that's the way developers usuallythink. But it does seem somewhat irrational in that I think they aregoing to pay the price for it along the way. Housing, on the otherhand, has been fairly decent in the Sixth District. All of thestatistical information shows a downturn, but I must say that theattitude of directors and business people that I talked to is fairlyoptimistic. Again, I find it a little difficult to understand wherethis optimism is coming from. Even in New Orleans and in Louisianagenerally, which are really in the pits as it were, they seem fairlysanguine about the situation and are looking for some uptick inactivity.Going to the national scene, I don't have any strongdisagreement with the staff; I think they are about right. I thinkthat Jim is quite right to put out some of these warning signals,particularly with respect to the consumer. Housing is definitelysomething that, if it continues, is going to be a source of strengthto the economy. There really isn't much else that one can point to inthe near future that's going to be a positive force. But I'm a littleconcerned that housing may not be as strong as the forecast. On theother hand, I don't really see that we're going to have anyappreciable decline in activity. So, I think the staff's forecast isabout right. I should add--and I meant to note this in my Districtreport--that people are talking about beginning to see some pricepressures building up in some businesses. They say it's related to11/4-5/85the value of the dollar, which surprises me a bit, because that wouldsuggest that the effect is occurring a little faster than we wouldhave expected. But they are definitely reporting some increase inprices coming from abroad.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who is?MR. FORRESTAL. "They" are basically in textiles--shirtmanufacturers and people like that. Their raw material is increasingin price.MR. MORRIS. What are the chances, Jim, that you're tooconservative on the net exports side? You don't show net exports asbeing a drag anymore but, certainly, we're not seeing any significantresponse to the fairly sizable decline in the dollar that has takenplace. Now, is this the normal--?MR. KICHLINE. I think what we have built in here is afairly normal historical response. I'll let Ted answer. I might saythat question catches me a little by surprise because the usualquestion we get is: Why do you have net exports rising? So, I haven'tthought about this one recently.MR. TRUMAN. I think that's the right answer; that's myreaction as well. We do have some increase. In fact the percentagechange on the export side we have is an increase of 7 percent in realterms for goods and services and 9 percent for goods alone. Theimport side is essentially flat or a very small decline--less than apercent in the imports in goods and a small increase in services,which would depend on more debt. So it's basically in line with whatwe have tended to say--this is the same question about the pricequestion on the other side. If you don't think prices are going tochange as much as some people argue, then import prices aren't goingto reflect it as quickly or as fully as with past exchange ratechanges. It also follows that you shouldn't get the response to theexchange rate changes as fully or as fast as in the past. So the twothings are sometimes linked together. We have tended a little towardthe conservative side on prices for various reasons, at least in theshort run. Until we know what is underway, we feel we shouldn't put alarge number in the forecast. Therefore, we also don't have a largenumber on the other, [real, side]; it's somewhat attenuated. But Ithink it's not far from what we believe is historical experience,given the quality of information on trade data at this point, which isnot very good.MR. KICHLINE. I might say that the net export sectorcontributes about a half percent to growth next year. So, we wouldhave essentially 2 percent real growth fourth-to-fourth quarter if youheld net exports constant. That's the impact of these numbers Ted istalking about.MR. MORRIS. On your gradual depreciation path, at what pointwill we expect to get a real upward kick from net exports? Obviously,it's not in 1986.MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think that's a pretty big kick: 9percent.11/4-5/85MR. KICHLINE. Well, you get a kick early on from servicereceipts in the reevaluation in the current quarter. But lookingahead, where we think this begins to kick in is at the very end of1986; presumably 1987 is the important year and it's beyond theforecast horizon. But it's late '86 at best where we see someparticular strength and then we see it carrying on.MR. TRUMAN. That's essentially a delayed reaction to thevery steep decline because from here on out we have a gradual move.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might ask Jim acouple of questions. Jim, you made some passing reference to theintroduction of IBM's new Sierra mainframe computers. I was struck bythis weekly publication of Citicorp the other day that estimated thereare 400 or 500 already on order to be delivered in the fourth quarter.That would cause a pretty sizeable increase in total producer durableequipment expenditures; it seemed huge to me, just looking at it. Iwondered if you had made any estimate of what that might do. Thesecond thing is that I'd taken some encouragement from the nonfarmpayroll employment figure and you suggested that ought to be averagedwith September, if I understood you correctly. Do you think that is aseasonal adjustment problem there or what?MR. KICHLINE. Yes. Let me comment on the employment figuresfirst. The problem occurs particularly in manufacturing andconstruction. In manufacturing, employment dropped 110,000 inSeptember, which we really didn't believe; and it rose 60,000 inOctober, which we don't believe either. And neither does the BLS.There are a couple of things going on. One is that the survey week inOctober was the earliest possible that could have occurred. Theseasonals are thinking in terms of declining employment in October,and it is thought that the survey week was so early it didn't pick upall of the decline; hence, seasonally adjusted, you get a largerincrease. Now, that's one part, particularly in manufacturing. Wehave some other evidence in terms of physical product and otherinformation that leads us to think there are some distortions. But Iwould still say it's a good number in that it is very clear that thosetwo months together look better than earlier in the year.With regard to the Sierra, we have seen [shipments] numbersthat range from an impact of $3 to $10 billion annual rate in thefourth quarter. We have talked to IBM and we have talked to others.Sothey are trying to build up what was a dismal year for IBM's earningsexpectations and make it all up in the fourth quarter, or do the bestthey can.Other manufacturers,being one, are just not doing very well at all. So wethink some offsets are occurring there. In addition, in the fourthquarter we expect a very sharp decline in business purchases of autossince some of those autos sold in the third quarter were businesspurchases at cut-rate terms. So the Sierra effect is a little-10-11/4-5/85uncertain. In our own thinking we picked a low-end number and used apositive $4 billion annual rate attributable to that, largely offsetby autos and to some extent truck sales, which we think will be down.But it is a big impact. If we're wrong--. As I say, the numbersoutside [forecasters are using] range from $3 billion to $10 billionannual rate and it depends in part on what you assume is happeningelsewhere in the computer industry.MR. BLACK. And also partly offset by declining shipments ofothers.MR. KICHLINE. That's right, yes.MR. BLACK. What they must have done in that Citicorp report,which was not clear to me, was to look just at the gross effect.MR. KICHLINE. Yes.MR. BLACK. It was surprisingly large; I wish I couldremember that percentage because it shook me. I ought to remember it,but senility has overtaken me and I can't.MR. PARTEE. You need a computer!MR. BLACK. I may be too old for that!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. There really is very little to report in the wayof change in our District since the last meeting. Those businessesthat have been showing some strength continue to do reasonably well.But there is certainly no noticeable improvement for the beleaguered.The steel industry and most lines of mechanical equipment remainawfully weak. On the steel side, the import restraints have had someeffect but they have been far from perfect. And pricing conditions inthe industry are very intense. Agriculture, I think, speaks foritself. The harvests have been late because of wet weather.Nonetheless, the crop estimates are being increased a bit, so that thepressure will continue on commodity prices. More positively--we'vecommented on the construction industry--certainly commercialconstruction in Chicago is very strong. I saw a presentation theother day showing that Chicago is going through a building period thathas been unsurpassed since the great fire. An awful lot of buildingsare going up. Just to add a comment to what Jim said earlier, theauto inventories really are very low; when they finished this bigsales program they were down to 24 to 26 days' [supply], which was thelowest inventory level in some 20 years. So, for the rest of thisquarter and going through January, one manufacturer at least is goingto be running absolutely flat out including their maximum overtimeschedule. They will be running their plants at the absolute maximumat least through January. Their outlook for '86 with regard to carsales is pretty good--a bit lower than ours but nonetheless the recentsales program hasn't had as big an impact on the '86 volume as onemight have expected. On balance, as we look at conditions in theDistrict, the staff forecast would be rather consistent with the waythat we see it.-11-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't had the last 10 days' autosales yet have we?MR. KICHLINE. No, it comes out this afternoon.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. To pick up on what Bob Forrestal said, I heardthe same thing from a major retailer in St. Louis: that in the FarEast the Japanese and others already are beginning to jack up priceson apparel and other textile goods. One other thing I've noticed intalking to people around the District is that there seems to be aninterest developing now in bidding on farm land. People have talkedabout it before but I sense now that there is some very seriousexpression of interest, along the lines of what Ed Boehne was sayingin terms of equipment, for putting together groups to bid on the land,which I think is a constructive development.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The first I've heard.MR. MELZER. That's at very low prices. This would be inArkansas and northern Mississippi and I'd say prices are probably down40 to 50 percent from their highs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. Well, on the one hand, it appears that thespillover effects of the agricultural problem in our District aregrowing in the sense that recent gains in employment in the Districtstates, to the extent they have occurred at all, have been sluggish.Unemployment rates in most District states have been on the increase.On the other hand, if you get away from the agricultural sector, thetone of the anecdotal comments that I've been hearing is that thesituation isn't great but it isn't bad either. I take that to beroughly consistent with the kind of forecast reflected in theGreenbook. And I think the Greenbook forecast is largely consistentwith the incoming evidence that we've been seeing in terms ofemployment as discussed, the strength in final demand, relativelyacceptable levels of inventories, and so forth. I guess it's fair tosay that we do have an ongoing construction boom in the Twin Cities.In both Minneapolis and in St. Paul vacancy rates have been rising,although they haven't kept up with the Sun Belt, so they don't looktoo bad relative to some of the national numbers. Developers thatI've talked to give roughly the explanation that you've heard: thatbasically it's an equity play for some financial institutions who feelthey missed out in the late '70s and early '80s and don't want to missthe next opportunity. Finally, I have not been disappointed, to dateanyway, by the performance in housing. At least in terms of the levelof starts, the first half came in somewhat stronger than I hadexpected. The fact that the last few months have been weaker doesn'treally surprise me. I don't think we're very good at timing thesethings precisely and I suspect that just as we did maybe a bit betterin the first half, we're now going to do a little worse. But, net, Idon't see any reason to think that anything terribly unusual is goingon so far in the relationship between rates and housing activity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.-12-11/4-5/85MR. BALLES. From the Twelfth District, there's a combinationof good news and bad news that we have had now for some long time.The areas which have been weak and continue to be weak are thetraditional ones that I have talked about so many times: forestproducts, agriculture, and oil. And now more recently, somewhat toour consternation, the electronics industry is in something of aslump, at least for the time being. On the other hand, there isconsiderable strength in defense spending and in the kinds ofcompanies that benefit from that. I suspect we are on the receivingend of an unusually big share of that in the West. My staff tells methat two of our states taken together, California and Washington, haveabout 28 percent of defense contracts, so that's obviously a strongplus in terms of the tone of business, at least in those two states.Retail trade figures seem to be going very well; most stores have beenreporting year-over-year sales gains of 5 to 10 percent. Auto salesare going well in most of the states. And of course the serviceindustries, which are not nearly as identifiable as anything likesteel or whatever, are reporting pretty good news in terms of theirperformance. Our staff reports that the market for single-familyhousing appears to be relatively healthy, which I was pleased to see.Whether it's permits, sales, or prices, all seem to be holding up inmost markets, although it differs quite a bit if one moves from stateto state. We do have nine states, but as a generalization this doesnot appear to be an area of great weakness at the moment.In terms of the outlook, our view is not much different fromthe Board staff's with respect to the balance of this year. Our staffis a little more optimistic as we look into 1986, simply in the sensethat we expect somewhat greater shrinkage of net imports--that therewon't be as big a drag on the economy as there has been in 1985. Ofcourse, this is a judgmental difference, but we think we ought to geta little more kick out of the improvement in our foreign tradeposition coming from the expected decline in the value of the dollar.That's the thumb-nail sketch from the West.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. John, I don't know whether I shouldask you or Bob Forrestal, but do you know if Boeing is expecting greatthings, particularly in the export side, from this new model 747 thatthey are beginning to market?MR. BALLES. Do you mean the 757?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, they have a new model, a veryhighly fuel efficient 747.MR. BALLES. Gee, Jerry, I am not familiar with what that is,unless it's a 747 SP.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, no, it's a new generation of--MR. BALLES. I haven't heard about that I am sorry to say.MR. STERN. Northwest ordered a bunch of them--I don'tremember how many--as part of the $2 billion capital spending programthat they have just initiated. But that's all I know about it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Do you know anything about it, Jim?-13-11/4-5/85MR. KICHLINE. No, I don't. I'm sorry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming in your budgetaryprojections about a farm bill?MR. KICHLINE. We have a $45 billion deficit reductionpackage for next year. That's about $8 billion less than theCongressional estimates. They expected $53 billion or so for fiscal1986.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not real?MR. KICHLINE. Well, what I am trying to tell you is that wedidn't accept the $53 billion figure. We think there will be overrunsin a number of areas. The farm area is a prime one; we don't have thespecific number on the farm bill, but we think that it is going tocome in higher than the Congress had expected.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] pretty optimistic--that's [unintelligible]. Why did you lower prices in your forecast?MR. KICHLINE. Why did we lower them? They are not reducedby much, a couple of tenths.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER AND MR. MARTIN. One half percent.MR> KICHLINE. Which price measure are you looking at--thedeflator?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm looking at any of them--grossdomestic business product deflator.MR. KICHLINE. All right. That's .4 down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Excluding food and energy.MR. KICHLINE. A couple of reasons: One is that the incominginformation in a couple of areas was a little better than we hadthought in the third quarter. That's the case for the gross businessproduct deflator. On compensation and wages, we went through thatagain and that continues to look really quite good to us, or indeedmaybe a little better. And with weakness in economic activity, we nowhave a little more slack in labor and product markets than we hadbefore. In addition, taking another look at what we were doing onimport prices, we felt that perhaps there was a reason to say it willcome along a little slower--that is, rising prices from the dollarwould occur later on in the year--so we pushed that back a bit. Andall of those things together add up to .4 on the index.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I just had two comments. One involves housingand the comment is that the tightening of terms and lending standardsis there and that it is going to get more prevalent. We haven't seenmuch of it yet in the statistics but that doesn't mean it won't showup in 1986. I just hear too many comments from specific lenders abouteither tightening on their own or being forced to by the mortgageinsurers; so I think that that may knock 100,000 to 200,000 off the-14-11/4-5/85numbers we are showing. Also, a comment on office building financing:If you get into some of the details, what you find is that the banksare doing the construction financing and they are willing to do itbecause there is permanent financing being supplied by the lifeinsurance companies. Also, there is still a lot of syndication goingon. There are rich doctors, lawyers and dentists who haven't adjustedto the new economic realities of a less inflationary environment and,also, they view this kind of investment as a good tax shelter. If taxreform measures actually get passed and the marginal rates are cut, Ithink that will kick that in the head real well. So, again, thecombination of the financing facts and the agency rates suggests thatsometime this is going to peak out, although I am not smart enough toknow when.One final comment about the value of the dollar: The businesspeople I talked with in the Midwest are certainly not sitting thereworrying about the inflationary impact of further declines of thedollar because they long ago ceased believing their economists'forecasts. But one thing they do know is that the appreciating dollarnearly killed them and they are making decisions right now on thingssuch as closing plants or moving production abroad. So time is of theessence here to get the dollar down, because these are decisions thatare not going to be reversed quickly if they ever are reversed.Somehow or other I don't think that we necessarily appreciate thatfact. They are not that concerned about what the declining dollarwill do to inflation, but they are very concerned about what willhappen in terms of their survival if it doesn't decline.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you ever find a businessman worriedabout his ability to raise prices when--. They like that.MS. SEGER. They also buy supplies, though, that are imports,It's a very competitive world out there.MR. PARTEE. They prefer to buy low and sell high.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I tried to have a very optimistic view ofthe economy all through the summer, thinking that there would be apretty good resurgence in the fall. There were some pretty favorableindicators at our last meeting, but I must say that this recent setbothers me. I am most affected, I guess, by the McGraw-Hill surveywhich is down one percent--and nobody mentioned that--in nominalterms. Now that's a pretty good survey. It's the oldest, and wealways thought the best, of the private surveys. That's a prettypoor, unrespectable survey result to be occurring in the fall afterboards have met and plans have tended to firm up for the next year.That did shock me. The other thing that I worry about is thatpersonal saving rate; the only thing you can do really is assume thatit won't come back very much. But it's so low that one wonderswhether there hasn't been some kind of a spending desire on the partof consumers associated with the use of credit that will disappear,and that in fact the automobile producers are wrong about theirforecasts for next year and it won't be as good as Si, I guess it was,suggested. I don't know; that bothers me. I am not sure, but it's avery mysterious thing to have a saving rate that low. After all,there was supposed to be an environment that would encourage saving in-15-11/4-5/85connection with supply side economics. It's totally the wrong answerthat has come out of the data from that point of view. It's verydifficult for me to incorporate the net export/import picture becausewe have had so little experience with that being a large factor. Itmight be that there could be a bigger increase in exports than thestaff has forecast, but the fact of the matter is that for the nextyear they have a contribution coming from net exports--that is,smaller net imports. It's the first time since 1980 that there hasbeen any contribution to the economy from that source, so it is arather radical change in GNP effect that they have already put inthere. As far as office building is concerned, I think the longer itgoes on the worse it is going to be. I don't know when it is going tobreak, but it is going to break pretty big; and the longer it goes onthe bigger the break will be when it occurs.So, I'm starting to lose my optimism; I figure at best wewill get the staff forecast for the period to come and it could be agood deal worse. There is a possibility of a recession and we need torecognize that. I said that last time, thinking of it as sort of aremote possibility. My feeling is that the possibility is a littlestronger now that there will be a recession some time in the next ninemonths. It's a distinct possibility. In any event, I would want topoint out to you--and I think this is what Pres Martin did--that thestaff forecast is well below our bogey for the performance of theeconomy. We [as a group] forecast 4 percent for the second half ofthe year, I believe, in real terms. Apparently, it is going to bewell below that. We forecast a pretty good 1986, and it looks asthough it is going to be below that by an appreciable percent or so.So we are below our bogey; that seems to be increasingly clear as themonths go by, and I think we will need to take that into account indetermining what the monetary policy ought to be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have made our forecast a bogey.MR. PARTEE. I thought it was a minimal acceptableperformance of the economy that we predicted in July. That's the wayit was presented in the Humphrey-Hawkins report, I thought: as asatisfactory performance. Otherwise, we would have needed a change ofmonetary policy to get a different economic result. So it wasacceptable, but now we have fallen more below that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You seem to be a GNP targeter.MR. PARTEE. I think I am, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure that the Committee hasaccepted that. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. As far as the District goes, I continue tothink that the tone is a little better in my part of the country thanit is in many of the other Districts. Even in the District, though,it is usually described as not great but not terrible. But I thinkit's generally above the national average.As far as the economy across the nation goes, I think we arevery much in the hands of the consumer and that gives me some pause atthis stage of the recovery, because I would have hoped that we couldbe getting some help from some of the other sectors, notably11/4-5/85investment. But as Chuck pointed out, that doesn't seem to be there;in fact, it seems to be a drag. Therefore, [the economy] pretty muchis riding on whatever momentum there is that the consumer is going toprovide; and looking at that one can avoid extreme pessimism, but itis awfully hard to get very upbeat about it. If you look at whatdrives the consumer, the job income side is moderate, but it seems tome the consumer is held back by the debt situation. Inflation hasbeen another factor that has either helped or hindered consumerspending. That seems to be about neutral: it doesn't seem to begetting any worse and it doesn't seem to be getting any better. Butin a kind of static dynamic view of the situation, we are not gettingany help from there anymore. And that leaves interest rates, whichalso have a major impact on what the consumer does, and I suppose theoutlook there is flat to down. We do have some constraints on theinternational side [in terms of] what we can do there. But I just getthe feeling that the expansion is much like a person entering hissenior years. He can go on a while longer, but I get the feeling thathe could fall over any time. And while I wouldn't predict arecession, I get the sense that sometime out there in the forecasthorizon this recovery is just going to fall over.MR. PARTEE. He's a lot younger than the average age.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I don't think I shallburden the Committee with reciting again the problems in our regionalarea, other than to tell you that the latest survey we have done atthe banks suggests that farm land prices have fallen another 5 to 6percent.MR. PARTEE. In what period is that?MR. GUFFEY. That's in the third quarter; they are down inthe 40 to 50 percent range now below the high of 1981. But there isanother activity that I would like to bring to the Committee'sattention. Because of the rather depressed conditions in our region,and based on the resourcefulness of the people who live in theMidwest, they do turn to other activities to provide food for thetable. As a result, game wildlife hunting is a big activity this timeof the year and I can tell you that, at least in the immediate areaaround the Bank, there is some optimism for the Thanksgiving holidaybecause the hunting season opened early. You will find four out ofseven Bluejays and four out of seven Cardinals will be served!MS. SEGER. I thought you were going to say that they got acouple of bankers to serve.MR. PARTEE. That's an upbeat report.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's turn to Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I can be quite brief. It seemsto me that the alternatives presented--not alternative C, butalternatives A and B at least--are generally consistent with thegrowth path adopted by the Committee for the fourth quarter at itslast meeting. One is toward the bottom end of that range and one, ina sense, is toward the middle or upper end. I should point out a-17-11/4-5/85technical point: that M1, for example, under alternative B we have 5percent; the Committee said 6 to 7 percent or lower. The hurricaneeffect raises M1 growth in September by 3 percentage points andreduces it in October by about the same amount. So in some sense that5 percent under alternative B could be construed as 6 percent with thehurricane allowed for. That's a minor bit of expertise. It does tendto buttress the point that the differences between "A" and "B"relative to the growth path adopted by the Committee are small. Theonly other point that perhaps one might make in a general way, Mr.Chairman, is that the weakness in the economy is in those areas mostsusceptible to long-term rates, and one could advance very gingerly aproposition that in providing reserves as they will have to beprovided over this period perhaps there is some usefulness inproviding them through acquisitions of coupon issues, at least to adegree, to do whatever could be done to keep pressures on long ratesfrom going up or encouraging them to go down even while short ratesmight need to be sustained for international reasons or for reasons ofmonetary growth rates.MR. MARTIN. Steve, let me ask: You pointed out some of thesimilarities of "A" and "B" with regard to the aggregates. Could youhelp me understand the differences--and I am talking forward now--inalternative A for the next short-run period versus alternative B? Youhave borrowings on page 8 [in the Bluebook] of $450 to $550 millionfor "B;" you have borrowings of $200 to $300 million for "A" on page10. That seems to me a rather substantial difference. Can you helpme rectify this?MR. AXILROD. Well, that was essentially a difference wethought was roughly consistent with a drop of a half point in thefunds rate, and presumably to a degree in other short rates. The--MR. PARTEE. And with no drop in the discount rate, I takeit?MR. AXILROD. No. But I feel absolutely certain that if theCommittee leaned in the direction of alternative A, expectations of adiscount rate decrease would shortly begin to dominate the market.And I think the risk, as we tried to indicate, would be that shortrates--at least in the short run--would fall more than is specified.MR. MARTIN. From midpoint to midpoint, that would be $500million for borrowing for "B" and $250 million for "A." So that's 50basis points?MR. AXILROD. Well, one model gives you 25 basis points per$100 million [on borrowing], and we tend to think judgmentally morelike 20 basis points per $100 million. These relationships are quiteloose, so I think that is consistent with what we have there.MR. PARTEE. You suggest a little operation twist.MR. AXILROD. Well, I didn't mean to be very--MR. PARTEE. As long as we have some time, would you like todiscuss that a little more? That's an unusual recommendation.-18-11/4-5/85MR. AXILROD. We are coming to a period of reserve need, andI guess I was bitten by fears of the dollar dropping sharply. Workingthrough that chart show, I think that the dollar is probably sensitiveto both short-term as well as long-term rates in some degree. So inproviding reserves over this period, I was trying to think of a waythat would minimize the possibilities of adverse expectational effectson the dollar. So I didn't really mean a substantial operation twist,but that when the opportunity came it might be desirable to thinkabout buying coupon issues rather than bills, depending a little onthe circumstances at the time and how people were thinking in themarkets.MR. PARTEE. Well, there will also be a bunch of Treasuryissues, I assume. Will any of those be coupons?MR. STERNLIGHT. There are likely to be. Yes, there is thenormal 3-, 10-, and 30-year issues that would have been up for auctionthis week that have been postponed. They just did last week the 4-,7- and 20-year issues that had been postponed by about a month becauseof debt limit problems.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only long-term fixed rate borrower wehave is the U.S. Treasury. I think there is very little in that idea.MR. AXILROD. You see that was not checked with the Chairman!MR. RICE. Is that because you think long-term rates have asmuch effect on exchange rates as short-term rates?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. First of all, I don't think the differencein their rate levels will be visible to the naked eye; and I thinkyes, that is a possibility.MR. PARTEE. We did study that operation twist at somelength, and I can't recall that there were any findings of significantdifference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In fact, I don't think there are manyprivate borrowers out there in the long-term markets.MR. PARTEE. Well, you have the mortgage borrowers: there area lot of those. And they prefer fixed rates if they can get them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's probably related more to the short-term rates.MR. PARTEE. There's [unintelligible] at least in the homemortgage market. Consumers have a very distinct preference for fixedrates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Some of it is fixed rate and some of it isfloating rate.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I am attracted to the idea of tryingto do a little something in the coupon end--not because I think it'sgoing to have any great effect on relative rates--but just because thethought runs through my head every now and then that at some pointdown the road we may feel that we have to do something in coupons for11/4-5/85other reasons, and if we get so removed from that segment of themarket the mere fact of doing something for a particular reason hasmuch more signal effect to it than we might otherwise want.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we want to do it for a particularreason, we presumably want to signal.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I am not sure of that.MR. RICE. You mean we may need the twist somewhere down theroad?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We may need something.MR. PARTEE. What do you mean: because the Treasury will haveso much difficulty financing? If so, why would they continue to issuecoupons?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't know what the precisecircumstances might be. I think preserving some flexibility--MR. PARTEE. I understand.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. --in our market presence isdesirable.MR. PARTEE. You don't extend that view to agencies, I takeit.MS. SEGER. Like Farm Credit?MR. PARTEE. Well, I didn't want to mention any particular--MS. SEGER. It would narrow that spread, if they knew the Fedwas in buying the Farm Credit ones.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only argument I hear for buying long-term issues is that the market expects us to buy long-term issues insome [unintelligible] or that we expect ourselves to buy long-termissues and, therefore, we ought to buy them.MR. BLACK. Oh, it might be kind of fun!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we buy them once in a while, you know.For what reasons, it's not quite clear to me.MR. PARTEE. Steve, you have [forecast] a pretty calm M1behavior for the remainder of the year. You are not expecting anyyear-end surge or anything like that?MR. AXILROD. Well, it's calm, largely because of theaveraging of the zero to minus one that we are projecting for October.Growth would have broken out--whether it's "A" or "B"--in between 8and 9-1/2 percent over that last two months of the year. Those arefairly substantial growth rates in and of themselves and, as wementioned, if rates went down and particularly if expectations carriedthem down more, we could get a powerful surge in M1 as rates moved-20-11/4-5/85closer to these NOW account ceilings. So there is a considerable riskof a very substantial growth, particularly under "A," I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M1 is very high. Well, I think ourproblem on that is relatively simple and difficult at the same time. Idon't attach a lot of weight to small changes in this forecast,whether it's prices or GNP within the ranges that are set. I don'tthink that we know what GNP is going to be in this quarter. Thingshave somewhat less than an ebullient tone to them, so I think: "Fairenough; one might think of easing slightly if the dollar gave one roomto do that." I am not sure it does right at the moment, but that's[unintelligible] a shorter-run perspective. I am considerablyconcerned that a continuing sharp decline and a real change insentiment there, which I think we're on the edge of, would give usmore difficulties than we bargained for. And whatever we do has totake that into account. The stronger the dollar is, the more we canease; the weaker it is, the more stuck we are.MR. RICE. But the amount of intervention that has occurredmost recently would suggest that there are still some strong upwardpressures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's all a matter of judgment. Theintervention that took place when we were intervening heavily is what:two weeks old? The big intervention was what: ten days ago? Sincethen the markets definitely have been on the other side. How much ofthis is short term? It could go back the other way; I don't know. Iwouldn't be unhappy if it went back the other way; it will give us alittle more room. But this is all a fairly narrow focus. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, I agree with your analysis, Mr. Chairman,because I don't think we have much room to maneuver here. If we hadsome evidence that the economy was softening, then I think we could goahead and move to lower rates, despite the growth in the aggregates.But I don't think we have anything to tie an easier posture to at thismoment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there is another element thatcould arise. I don't know what the odds are, but if Congress reallypassed one of these budget resolutions that calls for a sharply lowerdeficit than I think is at all probable in the current fiscal year,it necessarily follows that within weeks after they passed this bill,I presume, they would have to do something to cut expenditures in abig way. I might point out that the way some of those bills arewritten, it could include the Federal Reserve. Then I think we have akind of platform, and maybe a necessity, for seeing that interestrates go down. I don't know how much easing that would take; theymight go down by themselves.MR. MORRIS. That's exactly the kind of thing--something tohang our hat on--that we don't have now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the odds are onsomething like that happening. I am totally confused by this process;I don't know whether it is all a game, whether there is any chancethat they are going to get together, or whether they are carefullymaking positions that are mutually inconsistent so [unintelligible].They may end up with a bill that is vetoed. If it happened that we-21-11/4-5/85got a dramatic difference in the budget, in one sense it would beconstructive and in another sense it may be rather chaotic if they doit in a hurry. Then I think we have a new ingredient that we'd haveto take into account.MR. PARTEE. Well, Frank, I don't know. If we have acontinued sub-par performance of the economy, it would seem to me thatthat would be a reasonable justification. On Friday of this week wewill get the McGraw-Hill survey, which I think is going to be a bignews item. In addition, I think the retail sales figure, just becauseof car sales if nothing else, is going to be very poor.MR. MORRIS. I personally think that McGraw-Hill survey willreflect the decline in exchange rates. That certainly has to be aplus for domestic investors.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that it's going to make muchof a difference--maybe in the short run. I don't know how good thatsurvey is. Retail sales are assumed to be down because of auto sales;I guess you look at the rest of it.MR. PARTEE. Yes. I have no idea what that will show.MR. BOEHNE. I take it your basic proposition is to staywhere we are now but be alert for opportunities to ease, and thatthose opportunities may come from the international side or the budgetside or wherever. I think that makes a lot of sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's sort of where I am.MR. BOEHNE. I think that general proposition is quite sound.MR. RICE. I certainly agree with that proposition.MR. BLACK. Maybe we can get the post FOMC questions pre-lunch today.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's not assume too much.MR. BLACK. I just said "maybe." I didn't--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, looking at operational policy in ourusual format, I didn't hear anybody talking about anything thatsounded like alternative C. I suppose it's impossible that themonetary numbers would come out that low. Who knows? But I don'tthink anybody wants to drive them there, if I heard the conversationcorrectly. The difference between "A" and "B" in the actual numbersI'm not sure is big enough to send anybody very much. We had 6 to 7percent last time. We're in one of these mid-quarter periods when,just as a matter of form, I prefer to make fewer changes rather thanmore in these targets that we don't meet anyway. But--MR. PARTEE. We might as well leave it the same, right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is my inclination unlesssomebody--although where we had them was 6 to 7 percent and that maybe a little high.-22-11/4-5/85MR. PARTEE. That was for Ml?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it was--MS. SEGER. M2 and M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --6 to 7 percent for all of them. We caneasily say around 6 percent for all of them without it being asubstantial change. But in terms of the borrowing and our actualoperations, I heard more worries about being too tight than too easypurely on the domestic business outlook, which is not the wholeequation, certainly. From the standpoint of the international debtsituation and a lot of other things if interest rates came down, itwould be nice. On the other hand, I continue to be impressed by theamount of credit that this economy is dealing out, including in thereal estate construction area. I'm not sure that inviting it to spewout a little more is in the long-term interest of anything. But therewe are. Right now, as I suggested before, I would look toward notmaking any very startling changes; but if the dollar really gave usthe opportunity or--more remotely but conceivably--if the budget gaveus more opportunity, I'd be alert to go down in the absence of any newstriking news in the other direction. There's a slightly peculiarsituation in the market right now. We have had borrowing low all weekbut the federal funds rate is higher than one would expect, presumablyin reaction to Treasury financings. I presume that's just a passingphenomenon and that the market doesn't seem to be taking it seriously.Well, let's see what others have to say.MR. PARTEE. It's going to be hard to evaluate the budgetthing isn't it, Paul?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. I have no idea what'scoming out. I don't particularly expect this, but I suppose onepossibility is that they could pass something that virtually demandedexpenditure cuts pretty quickly. I don't know how you avoid them ifthey pass something. The budget is clearly running above what theysay. I can see how they might ignore this law next year if they passit; it's a little hard to see how they ignore it three weeks afterthey pass it. I have no idea what's going to come out of this. Iwould think from the Administration's standpoint, Congress has managedto screw it up enough that the bill would end up being vetoed, so youhave nothing. I would think that may be the most likely scenario--orthat they just never agree so they finally pass the debt ceiling billand they give in on the thing.MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's possible.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or they could pass it in the Senateversion and could say that it has no implications for this year sothey'll think about it next September, in which case it would not havemuch implication for us either, I guess. Any one of the above [ispossible], and I have no idea how it's going to come out.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, would that argue for a bit widerrange in the borrowing without having to consult with this group,considering the wide range of both that uncertainty and the dollaruncertainty and so forth?-23-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we ought to leave ourselvesa little range on the dollar side. I don't mind consulting when thechange gets significant in any event, but a little week-to-weekflexibility or two-week flexibility is useful.MR. RICE. Or aiming for the lower side of the range more sothan the upper.MR. PARTEE. Or changing the range.MR. RICE. Oh, I wouldn't go that far.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what do have now: $400-$600 million?MR. RICE. We could talk about $400 to $500 million.MS. SEGER. $300 to $500 million.MR. RICE. Aiming at being more comfortable? Or is it asclose to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $350 to $550 million. I think we're inthat neighborhood someplace.MR. MARTIN. $350 to $500 million.MR. PARTEE. We're now at $450-$550 million, and saying wewould like to err toward some ease--if there is an opportunity--andwidening that band on the low side is a good idea.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in case we get too involved in thenumerology here: These are always starting points and if somethingelse happens, we can go below it or above it.SEVERAL. Sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's clear enough. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. One thing that struck me, really, is thevolatility of expectations about the economy around the table. Thismonth they tend to be negative, while last month they were veryconstructive. Before that I think they tended to be negative. Thatonly leads me to the conclusion that there is still a lot ofuncertainty with respect to what's going on in the economy, and Ipersonally wouldn't be inclined to overreact to that. The other thingI would say is that there was mention yesterday of expectations in themarket about the possibility of a concerted action among the G-5countries to get the dollar down. So any easing that is undertaken inthe near term here could be misconstrued in a sense, in the context ofthat, and could be potentially very damaging in terms of that thought.It could cause a more dramatic fall in the dollar.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might say in that connection, just incase there's any uncertainty around the table, that this move of theJapanese to increase their rates came out of the clear blue sky as faras I am concerned. I still don't quite comprehend it. I'm not sure,but in the larger scheme of things I assume they did it--maybe it willaffect the yen in the short run--given that the Japanese economy is11/4-5/85not showing much pep and that they just absolutely are blocked on thefiscal policy side. It's not the move that I would have chosen.MR. MARTIN. It's certainly not consonant with the actionplan: the notion of stimulating housing and infrastructure spending.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It goes I think in the wrong basicdirection. Excuse me.MR. MELZER. The other thing that I have been turning over inmy mind, in reaction to yesterday's presentation, is a feeling that interms of responding to a rapidly declining dollar my instincts lead meto feel that the right national policy response to that is probablyfor interest rates to rise somewhat. Easing in response to a weakerdollar had some implications that I didn't particularly like. WhatI've been thinking about is that we already have had a fairlysignificant decline of the value of the dollar and that possibly someof the general dynamics that were talked about in the hypotheticalpresentation yesterday may be coming into play here. We may bedealing with a sort of natural increase in interest rates and I don'tknow, frankly, whether it would be appropriate to lean against thattoo heavily. Now, I know there are other considerations. Net, basedon those several considerations, I would be inclined to stay where weare, with some degree of reserve restraint, and not be looking for thenext opportunity to ease at this juncture.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me introduce another smallrefinement, given where the dollar is now and given the greaterhesitancy in the market and all the rest. It is given that there arerisks on both sides. But given the risks of this thing getting alittle out of hand--in terms of speed anyway--I guess I don't see muchpoint in intervening aggressively to push the dollar down or to holdit down. If the dollar is all that strong, in the short run it mightbe that the proper response is through a modest monetary policy changerather than trying to do it by intervention. It takes a littleflexibility to get it on the monetary policy side. So, interveningvery heavily increases the risk you are talking about: it freezes us;it has the opposite effect.MR. PARTEE. I get awfully uncomfortable with the idea thatwe should put the dollar as the centerpiece of policy. I think theeconomy is the centerpiece of [policy].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure I see that distinction.MR. PARTEE. I don't disagree that the dollar is asignificant variable, but I would point out that the objective was toget the dollar down. That was a program to which you agreed: to getthe dollar down. And it has come down and, I think, has behavedextremely well. I thought for the whole period between meetings thatthe dollar had a lifting tendency and that's why we had to do theintervention. If it doesn't lift, we don't do the intervention. Itwas just very recently that we got a little weakness. And I think theweakness has come because of the Japanese raising their rates, whichis certainly a contra-economic policy from a world point of view--notbecause of anything we did. So, I don't disagree with what is beingsaid about the dollar, but I would again want to emphasize that I11/4-5/85think what we need to have is a decently performing domestic economy.That's the primary objective of monetary policy.MR. MORRIS. I can see the case for moving to somewhat lowerinterest rates, but I don't see that that necessarily means weshouldn't intervene also.MR. MARTIN. It seems to me--I don't know whether Tom wouldagree with this--that we're talking about the immediate 2 or 3 weeksof the 5- or 6-week intermeeting period. I would think by the end of5 weeks we might have enough feedback from the markets and from ourown economy to change our position, which I would certainly agree to.We don't need to ease this moment but that doesn't say that 5 weeksfrom now we might not.MR. MELZER. That's right. Sure.MR. RICE. Where do you see the natural tendency of interestrates--to rise right now?MR. MELZER. I guess it's relatively minor, but some weeksback we were running borrowing levels that were well in excess of thesomewhat lower target and funds were trading below 8 percent. Now wetend to be running at borrowing levels that are somewhat below thetarget and funds are modestly above 8 percent. It's relatively minor:15 to 20 basis points.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Chuck, I agree with your point aboutthe primacy of the economy, but I come out a little differently interms of emphasis at the margin. With that primacy in mind I say tomyself: What are the things that are on the table in the very nearterm that could really louse up the situation with the domesticeconomy in a major way? And the one that just leaps out at me is therisk--and everybody puts his own arithmetic on this--of the dollarbreaking out on the down side. If that happens, the one thing we'resure of--or at least I'm sure of--is that that would do considerabledamage to the domestic economy and the world economy.MR. PARTEE. If it broke down sharply, yes. We have had agreat big program to bring it down and we have gotten it down alittle. The evidence hasn't been that it is tending to rush away.Maybe it will. I agree with you that that would be a bad thing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is downMR. PARTEE. I don't know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know.MR. PARTEE. Nobody ever told me what the program envisaged,so I don't have any sense [of that].MR. MORRIS. If you attribute it solely to the program.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not talking about the long run---26-11/4-5/85MR. MORRIS. We have had a bigger response than I would haveexpected solely from the program.MR. PARTEE. Oh, we certainly have. I think the timing wasexcellent in terms of making the program look effective. Anyhow,having been worrying about a high dollar for the last year and a halfor two, I find it a little odd that we're now talking about howserious the possibility is. And there is a possibility that it isgoing to break all the way down; [I don't know] how clear and presentthe danger is. I suspect that some of Gov. Seger's manufacturerswouldn't mind a little further drop.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They would like the yen at about 120 and--MR. MORRIS. The fact is, Chuck, that the markets that have ahigh level of speculative activity tend to overshoot, both on the upand the down side. And that makes this not something to be concernedabout in a [unintelligible] way.MR. PARTEE. Are you suggesting that after I have left here,the Committee is going to keep the interest rates very high to keepthe dollar from falling? And thus put [the country] in a majorrecession that the rest of the world is in--MR. MORRIS. No.MR. PARTEE. With the same bad policy?MR. MORRIS. No. I would think that one would describe whatwe are talking about now as hoping to avoid the necessity for that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Precisely. The dollar going down isn't afree ride. That's what the people were supposed to demonstrateyesterday. It may have to get down over a period of time; it probablydoes. How it gets there and what the accompanying policies are makesall the difference.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Again, go back to that chart nine inyesterday's presentation. We sit here and we have a situation, whichwe have had for a long time, where we have a simply lousy fiscalpolicy. Monetary policy is trying to out-muscle and out-maneuverthat, and there is a point here where it just can't be done.MR. MARTIN. Let me play devil's advocate for just a minute.We have been talking about what I think is the real risk of aprecipitous decline of the dollar. We had a good staff presentationyesterday on the same subject. On the other side of this issue is thelack of real action by our trading partners of any kind ofcoordination of policy, fiscal or monetary. And the Japanesecontradiction is exhibit A. Now, suppose the market players feel thatthere is not going to be any change in fundamentals--we all know thelimitation of intervention policy--and the market moves the other way.Is that of some probability? It may not be the most probable outcome.MR. MELZER. I think that's possible.-27-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then if domestic business looks somewhaton the softer side, then it is an opportunity to ease--to lowerinterest rates.MR. STERN. That strikes me as a possibility as well. Andthat probably would provoke some natural upward pressure on thedollar.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, then we're in the dilemma that wehave been in for years. You have a simple choice: What sector of theeconomy takes the rap for inflation?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Then they all take the rap.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is all very useful, but I detect thatwe have a rather more limited range of possibilities. I think thisconversation is very relevant, but I don't know whether you want toextend the general conversation or focus on just what we put down herefor a directive.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As far as policy itself isconcerned, I'd be quite comfortable with alternative B as in theBluebook. That had borrowing of $450 to $550 million, but I could gowith the $350 to $550 million range that Governor Martin suggested.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Making it 5 to 6 percent [unintelligible],I guess--that's one possibility. We could just reduce it from 6 to 7percent to 5 to 6 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm somewhat agnostic on that. Ithink the [unintelligible] to me at this point isn't so much whetherit's 5 to 6 percent or 6 percent, it's the framework that wedescribed: that given the domestic economy, if the opportunity werethere to try and nudge things down a bit we would grab it. I don'tknow how you can articulate that in a very precise way. So, I wouldlean toward the 5 to 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What this will be, I suppose, is "maintainthe existing degree...." It has fluctuated a little.MR. MARTIN. We wouldn't want to say "decrease slightly"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you take the most recent week, it'sdown below $400 million, I presume. The most recent 2 weeks--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think we can quite say that.We might be able to jiggle "woulds" and "mights."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But all these words imply more precisionthan we have had in the last 4- or 5-week period in terms of a preciselevel of borrowing. Most of the time we have been below what we aretalking about.MR. MORRIS. Since we are having a wider borrowing range,wouldn't it make sense also to have a wider range for the aggregates--maybe 5 to 7 percent?-28-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it wouldn't bother me. But I'm justwondering whether there is some word in that first sentence thatimplies something consistent with the existing degree but also impliesa little broader interpretation of what the existing degree is.MR. AXILROD. "About"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say "about the existing degree".We could say "seeks to generally maintain about...." Do we put in 5to 6 percent or 5 to 7 percent?MR. RICE. 5 to 6 percent.MR. PARTEE. I would think we ought to put in 6 percent oraround 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we still say "a marked slowing of M1growth"? It depends. It's certainly true for the quarter. But it isnot exactly true if you take October as the base. I guess it's overthe period there as a whole.MR. PARTEE. It's certainly true that we already have had thenumber that makes the 3 months slower. I wonder whether we shouldleave it out and make it around 6 percent in all three [aggregates] inthe previous sentence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't feel strongly about this butthat implies that we drop out the other part of the sentence that sayswe don't mind if M1 comes in quite low. Do you want to drop that outor not? As I look at it, it might be useful to keep that.MR. PARTEE. That's right. We could keep that the way thestaff has it here in brackets and still not have that previous phrase,Paul.MR. BLACK. We could just say "Growth in M1 over the periodat an annual rate of around 6 percent is also anticipated."MR. GUFFEY. Yes. I think that's good.MR. MARTIN. That's not what's anticipated in the Bluebook.It's 7 percent.MR. BLACK. It is if you go with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 5 to 6 percent is what's anticipated.Well, I am not sure how much that captures what we are talking about:"The Committee seeks to generally maintain about the existing degreeof pressure." Then it is "6 percent," "6 percent" again, and "slowergrowth would be acceptable."MR. MARTIN. And "somewhat lesser would" and "somewhatgreater might."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way it is written now there is oneverb for both of them. How do we split it? We used to split it. Nowit seems to take a radical change in language.-29-11/4-5/85MR. AXILROD. You could say "somewhat greater reserverestraint might and somewhat lesser restraint would be acceptable,depending on" behavior. That makes it very clear.MR. MARTIN. The juxtaposition would delight the Fedwatchers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Boy, I tell you! That really emphasizesit.MR. MARTIN. They would count the words in prior directives.MR. BLACK. I think we create less problems if we always keepthem as "woulds" so it is symmetrical in both directions.MR. MARTIN. We don't want to be symmetrical.MR. BLACK. I know you all don't. But symmetry is one of myfavorite attributes. You can't tell by looking at me!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's just a matter of language. Wesay: "generally;" "about 6 percent for M2 and M3;" and "6 percent forMl." Then "Slower growth of that aggregate would be acceptable in thecontext of satisfactory economic performance, given the very rapidgrowth in M1 over the summer. Somewhat greater reserve restraintmight and somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable." Weleave the range of 6 to 10 percent [for the funds rate]. Now, doesanybody have improvements on that language?MR. BLACK. Make them both "woulds."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have one vote for both "woulds." Theborrowing range we're talking about is roughly $400 to $600 million;the possibility of making that $350 to $550 million has been broached.I don't think there is an enormous difference between those two.Mechanically, it's $50 million.MR. BLACK. It's more important to me where we start off. Isit anticipated that we will start at $500 million? That was sort ofthe tenor of the discussion, as I read it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that depends a little. Yousay start off at $500 million; I don't think we will want to go to$500 million this week when the federal funds rate is high, althoughthe dollar is [weak]. Even with the dollar weak, with the federalfunds rate as high as it is, we weren't anxious to go to $500 millionthis week. It may have been what we had in the path but we--MR. BLACK. I am really talking about the path. I recognizethat those points you make are very valid points.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would say consistent with $350 to $550million, the center of gravity would be a little less than $500million but not much. I would say something like $475 million, whichis right in the middle. No it's not; it's $450 million. I can't domy arithmetic right!-30-11/4-5/85MR. PARTEE. I would like to see the funds rate drift down,maybe an 1/8th of a point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the dollar was not weak, I see nothingthe matter with that; certainly, you wouldn't expect it to stay whereit is now. And I think there is no expectation in the market, as nearas I can see, that that's the appropriate funds rate.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, what do you have in mind when youspeak of the dollar being weak, in terms of this intermeeting period?Are you talking about stringing ten days together all on the down sideof some magnitude? Or are you going to let it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have that mechanical a test--thatit takes ten consecutive days of decline.MR. GUFFEY. I guess when you talk about the implementationof this policy, I don't know what "weakness in the dollar" reallymeans.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure I can describe it purely inexchange rate terms, although obviously a weak dollar means that theexchange rate is tending to weaken. However, when you try to quantifythat, I don't know. Sometimes it doesn't feel good.MR. RICE. A good test is how much intervention.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we were actively intervening on kind ofboth sides, that would be a good test. Two weeks ago, or whenever itwas that the dollar had a little strong feeling to it, there was a lotof intervention to keep it from going up. It was clearly, in thattime period, strong. I would say in the last week it has been a biton the weak side.MR. GUFFEY. The weak side with respect to the yen largely?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would be one of my measures. If itwas just the yen and it wasn't infecting the psychology generally andrates generally, we would have a different situation. But that's notwhat we had in the last week. I guess the movement was greatestagainst the yen, but it was clearly affecting the others too. Isuppose the preferable thing, if the yen really got weaker, is thatthe Japanese might ease up a bit, but I don't think they'll do it.That might be the better way to do it.MR. GUFFEY. My point is that I would like to see rates comedown a bit, but it isn't clear to me how that occurs. If the dollaris a constraint and the measure of the dollar's weakness is feel, howdo you get there?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the dollar is weak, you can see it inthe market, but I don't think you can measure it by the extent of amechanical measure or movement.MR. PARTEE. I find your description too subjective also. Iguess I would just have to vote for an easier money policy instead ofaccepting something as fuzzy as you described.-31-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One way of getting out of it is to have abad policy.MR. PARTEE. Well, I think it's a private policy. I'm tryingto bow a little toward you internationalists, but I can't bow too muchbecause I think we need to be easing up a little.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, so we divide it up. What borrowinglevel are we talking about? Who prefers $350 to $550 million?MR. BLACK. What is the alternative, Mr. Chairman?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the alternative can be anythinganybody thinks of.MR. BLACK. I don't have any problem with that, consideredasymmetrically, but I just don't know on which side the other one isgoing to be. I guess it is going to be a lower level, isn't it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somebody expressed an opinion of $400 to$600 million, staying right where we are. That's slightly higher butothers may be lower.MR. BLACK. If we have the choice of staying right where weare, that's the one I would prefer rather than this one. If this isthe higher--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At this point, you have any choice at all,but I don't know if anybody's going to join you.MR. BLACK. Well, if we're reasonable about it, I think I'lljoin the majority this time. That's what I am trying to do: getsomething I can agree with.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, who wants it higher? Who prefershigher than that? Well, do you prefer slightly higher than $350 to$550 million?. I don't hear anybody expressing that. Thesedifferences are very small. The other alternative, I guess is: Whoprefers slightly lower than that?MS. SEGER. I do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have one on each side, so I--MR. BLACK(?). We sit next to each other and balance it out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think $350 to $550 million is theclosest we're going to come to a consensus.MR. PARTEE. I think of $450 million as being the startingpoint. I don't know whether that puts me on Governor Seger's side.MR. BLACK. That's the midpoint.MR. PARTEE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with $450 million beingthe center of gravity. But---32-11/4-5/85MR. BLACK. Just as an added bit of information, could we askSteve and Peter to give us some idea of what they think the federalfunds rate associated with that might be?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think at that level that the fundsrate would tend to be around 7-7/8 to 8 percent. My thinking with$500 million is right around 8 percent, maybe 8 to 8-1/8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. An illustration of that, if I am not wrong,is that when we were above $500 million the funds rate was below 8percent and now that we are at $375 million, it is above 8 percent.MR. STERNLIGHT. One little thing that has happened is thatseasonal borrowing has come off some recently, and I think that tendsto make the given level [unintelligible] a tiny bit more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My guess is that it would be a federalfunds rate slightly below 8 percent--or maybe even more than slightly--depending upon expectations in the market. It isn't very reliablefrom week to week. If people think rates are going down, the federalfunds rate will probably go down; if they think they are going to goup, it is going to go up. It sits there for several weeks untilpeople change their minds.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it is generally aboutunchanged and it will be generally about unchanged.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a situation where in the past fewdays it has been above 8 percent. If the statistics are right, themarket is going to be quite easy tomorrow, but that will show up maybeat 4:30 in the afternoon. In the previous two-week period, it wasbelow 8 percent most of the time and showed up in a tight money marketwhat--at 5:30 in the afternoon? For a whole day it was above 8percent on that Wednesday. I think we are at the center of gravity asnearly as I can see. We are left with what flexibility there isaround it.MS. SEGER. Peter, are you more sensitive to rate movementsagain? I know we are not targeting them, but are you more sensitiveto what happens, say, the first day or two after an FOMC meetingbecause every Fed watcher in the world is hanging over his or hertelerate and over the various machines?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think there's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the plan gets a little tricky here. Ithink we have been avoiding, except in more extreme cases--well, notthat extreme, but 1/4 percent, 3/8 percent above where we would expectit to be--just intervening on the basis of the federal funds rate,because then you really feed this notion that we are going to guidethe federal funds rate within an eighth or within a quarter. We gotin trouble in the past with that and I want to avoid it if I can.MS. SEGER. Well, what if tomorrow at 11:00 a.m.--the dayafter the FOMC meets--the fed funds rate is at 10-1/4 percent?MR. STERNLIGHT. It's also the final day of the reserveperiod, and I think that's---33-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At 10-1/4 percent, we'd probably put somemoney in, even if it is contrary to what the statistics seemed toshow.MR. RICE. Even if it is the final day of the maintenanceperiod.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, if it's 10 1/4 percent in themorning, I think that might suggest something is the matter.MR. BLACK. I think I would even advocate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's an outside [case]. If it were8-1/2 percent or something, it's a more difficult question. It maywell happen tomorrow that the federal funds rate is 8-1/4 percent,even though the borrowings are running whatever they are running now--$375 million. Then we have a much more difficult decision to make.We may not do anything, but 8-1/2 percent begins getting marginal; Iwouldn't like to do it at 8-1/4 percent or 8-1/8 or 8 percent, justbecause we theoretically thought that the funds rate should be 7-7/8percent--or the reverse when it got lower. A few weeks ago it wasrather consistently lower. We might do it earlier or later in theweek, depending upon how the funds rate was going. I would be lessthan forthcoming if I did not say those judgments as to whether toanticipate or delay action a little bit partly would depend upon whatthe dollar was doing on that particular day.MR. PARTEE. I wonder whether the borrowing level shouldn'tbe in the directive. It seems to me that that's what we areconcentrating on now and it's not even specified. It used to be thatwe said the aggregates, which were in there; then we said the reservepressures, which were in there. But the fact of the matter is thatthis discussion of policy for the last hour has been almost entirelyon the question of what the initial borrowing level will be and it isnot even mentioned in that directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not mentioned apparently, that's right.MR. BALLES. The emperor has no clothes.MR. PARTEE. It might not be a bad time to introduce it,since we have a pretty wide range: $350 to $550 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know that we want to take such aradical step this morning at this late hour, but--MR. PARTEE. I'm just struck by it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the problem with it is that it pinsus to a very precise number. You are right that it is a wide range,but we don't always have that kind of a range. Our ability to hitthat consistently is not overwhelming.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's true of the other things mentionedin the directive.-34-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well understood. After you put theborrowing level in there for a while and don't meet it, then you willbe looking for something else.MR. BALLES. One more target to miss!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will put in next quarter's GNP--this isMr. Partee talking! I don't know whether he wants the flash or thepreliminary or the final revised figure 10 years from now.MR. PARTEE. I want an average for the next four quarters.MR. BLACK. That's what Mike Keran says our target is, nowthat he is out of the Federal Reserve System.MR. PARTEE. I really thought he was right until this morningwhen the Chairman denied it.MS. SEGER. If we are forced by Humphrey-Hawkins to talk interms of GNP growth and unemployment and inflation, it seems to me,though, that sometime it has to be tied into what we do, whether weare targeting it precisely or not.MR. PARTEE. I used to think that way when the bill waswritten [unintelligible]. I even thought the Congress might ask: Whydon't you get a better outcome?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the difficulty with thatapproach is that it rather promises more than we can deliver.MR. PARTEE. That seems to be true of everything.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. That's precisely it. It istrue of most things. If it were as simple as that, we'd never have arecession or inflation. Well, maybe we're prepared to vote. Are weprepared to vote?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.MR. BALLES. Can you repeat the specifications so we will allbe singing from the same hymn book.MR. BLACK. You do that and we may not get unanimity!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the numbers are all clear in thedirective and the language. They are all 6 percents with a "would"and a "might" worked in there. It's 6 to 10 percent, I presume, onthe federal funds rate. And we are talking $350 to $550 million, with$450 million the center of gravity and with some flexibility of goingup or down depending upon the aggregates and all this other evidence,including the exchange market.MR. MARTIN. And a slight bias toward a little moreaccommodation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which is expressed to some degree inchanging the range itself and in the "would" and "might" language.-35-11/4-5/85MS. SEGER. But the monetary growth numbers are cut back fromwhat we talked about at the last meeting.MR. PARTEE. Because we have had that low October.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are at the bottom end of the range.MR. BLACK. They don't matter when they are over; theyshouldn't matter when they are under either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to discuss this other paragraphtoo, but if we know enough to vote on this one, let us vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger NoCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we have this other paragraph. Somepeople's consciences suggest that something like this is appropriate.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, since the market seems to belargely disregarding large swings in M1, I think to add this paragraphthat is on page 12 of the Bluebook would call attention to somethingin an inappropriate way. We had some language in this direction sixweeks ago; I think the same logic applies today.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are right; we had some language in thediscussion six weeks ago; we could sharpen that and say something likethis in the general discussion as an alternative, if that's desirable.Now, the question that was raised was whether we have to make anannouncement of this. I don't mind saying this: Since everybodyanticipates it anyway, it looks a little odd to go out of one's way tofind the special occasion to say it. I might be testifying later thisweek. If I do, I could just plant a question; that's easy. But if Idon't, I need some natural occasion to--MR. MARTIN. If we say it this way, isn't there a slightimplication that we're leading up to putting M1 in the future into amonitoring range or something of that sort? If we go out of our wayto say this, aren't we saying: "Next week, folks, we are going to putM1 on a monitoring--."MR. MORRIS. I would hope so.MR. BLACK. If you are right, Pres, you have just changed mywhole view.this?MR. MARTIN. I'm asking. Is that the implication of stating-36-11/4-5/85MR. PARTEE. It seems to me the word is "acceptable" insteadof "appropriate." If you use the word "acceptable," it doesn't implyanything as to the future. I wonder what a reading of theCongressional history of the Humphrey-Hawkins [legislation] wouldsuggest. There used to be the idea that if the targets were changed,the Congress would be notified that the targets were changed. We havenever utilized that, but I recall that as being characteristic of theHumphrey-Hawkins--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any doubt. If wewere making a change in targets and that implied some change in theway we're approaching things, the implication is that we'd announceit. Now, this has kind of crept up on us--well, [not] crept up; itstarted out with a burst when we did it. But the point ofinterpretation is that we haven't said we had to announce it when wethought we were going to miss a target. We have missed lots of them.Is this missing a target or is this a change in target? That's thequestion.MR. MORRIS. To me, it's changing the targets because weclearly are not attempting to hit the targets.MR. AXILROD. On Friday, when the directive of the previousmeeting comes out, it will be clear, as everyone knows, that theCommittee was not aiming at hitting this target, given the September-to-December [figure]. I believe we could put it in the policy recordas you suggested, Mr. Chairman, and just say that the Committee, inits discussion, recognized that given the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that takes care of it insubstance, but that's not announced for a month; that's the only realproblem. Are we forced to make an announcement here? We probably aredancing on the head of a pin, but I don't know whether you can findsome previous time where we missed a target--I suspect that you could--whereby this late in the year it was evident that we were not goingto hit it and we weren't aiming at it.MR. GUFFEY. If we were missing M3 or debt, we wouldn't beconsidering this, it seems to me; and I don't think we should for M1.I wouldn't raise the question: "Why is M1 more important than M2 or M3in the context of policy?"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. People think it is.MR. GUFFEY. I understand that, but to the extent we coulddiminish that perception, I think it's important. Therefore, Iwouldn't do it.MR. MORRIS. I recall in October 1982 we specifically statedthat we were setting aside the M1 targets for the year, and that wasin the minutes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Was it in the minutes or did we dothat in this business of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I think that was announced. Thesubstantive difference is that then we weren't so far off. We wereoff, but not so far off, and it was meaningful to say we were not-37-11/4-5/85[aiming to hit it]. This time people know we're not going to hit it,I think.MR. MORRIS. Well, as I recall, it would have taken a zerogrowth rate in the last quarter to hit the target in '82.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This time it would take a minus.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, do you think there are anyexpectations or fears in the markets that we might actually takeactions to get back close to that 3 to 8 percent range? If there are,I think it would be well if we eliminated those fears or expectations,and putting this paragraph in would be a way to do it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there is that expectation,but the question may be there. It's a question of how hard we'retrying to come closer; I think that is the practical question. Ifthey did their arithmetic, I don't think anybody really would think weare going to hit it or even are trying, because we would have to saywe are aiming for a minus figure in the fourth quarter like weachieved in October.MR. BOEHNE. If you look at what we say here about the M1range, we say that there are a lot of uncertainties surrounding itincluding velocity, etc. When you testified back in July, you wrappedit in a lot of uncertainties. I would think we'd be smarter to treatthis as simply a miss of a target and say: "We pointed out last Julywhen we set it that this was a very fuzzy target, given all theuncertainties, and we missed it." My sense is that's the way peopleon the outside read it now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I feel under no pressure to make such anannouncement on this.MR. BOEHNE. And I wouldn't want to put the spotlight onthis picture.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have no trouble with doing it ifan occasion arose to do it in the next few days very simply. Mylittle trouble is what do we do--put out a press release or something?I don't know what the heck people would--MR. BOEHNE. I wouldn't do that.MR. PARTEE. Well, your speech in Toronto was interpreted bysome--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sorry now in retrospect that I justdidn't say that. I wasn't thinking about it, but I could have easilysaid that we're not going to meet the target a little more directly.I'm sorry I didn't because that would have taken care of it.MR. STERN. I think we should say something like this myself,in part because we're not under any pressure to do so, and yet comingforth with some additional information or clarification under thosecircumstances strikes me as a plus.-38-11/4-5/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The issue, it seems to me, is do we put itin here? What would you do as a practical matter apart from what weput in here? Go out and make an announcement tomorrow?MR. BOEHNE. I wouldn't make an announcement. I would waitfor a very natural occasion and simply say that the uncertaintiessurrounding M1 continue and the range is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do have a speech on the 19th or sometime.MR. BALLES. Yes you do, in Los Angeles.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that's two weeks off.MS. HORN. It doesn't seem to me that time is of the essencehere. Two weeks from now is fine; it wasn't as if we decidedsomething at this meeting relative to M1.MR. BOEHNE. I think if we put out an announcement--MS. HORN. If it's two weeks from now, it's fine just to sayit a little more clearly than you did in Toronto.MR. BOEHNE. If we put out an announcement along these linesnow, I think it will be interpreted as the Fed is about to ease.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I agree with that.MR. BOEHNE. I don't think we want to convey that at thispoint. We may want to ease but I don't think we want to convey that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if that's the way you feel about it,I'll couch it in appropriate words in Los Angeles if I don't find asuitable occasion when I'm in public to say it before then.MR. FORRESTAL. And leave it out of the directive?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what do you want to do? I wouldleave it out of the directive but say it pretty clearly in thediscussion.MR. FORRESTAL. Yes, I think that's a good way to do it.MR. BOEHNE. I do too.MR. GUFFEY. Well, given the record that will be published onFriday this week, it will be no surprise that we're not going to makethe 3 to 8 percent target. And I don't see any reason to make anyannouncement at all, unless you're asked the question.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can put it into a speech easilyenough. I could just put in some sentence saying of course we're notgoing to meet this--that given what has happened, we don't have anyexpectation that we're going to be within the range. That's notdifficult.-39-11/4-5/85MR. PARTEE. We have had commentary from both the House andthe Senate on the summer Humphrey-Hawkins [report], haven't we? Andthe House specifically recommended that we not. But the Senate Ithink--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I haven't answered those yet, haveI? That's another thing we can do. They send a letter and say: Whatcomments do you have? I could just put it in the answer. That's whatI could do: put an answer in that letter.MR. PARTEE. That, it seems to me, would follow theprocedure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think those are on my desk, aren't they?MR. AXILROD. This letter?MR. PARTEE. These are on the two reports. I have copies;I'm sure all Board members have.MR. FORRESTAL. It's the Fauntroy report.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I have those letters on my desk.MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. ROBERTS. You have the Fauntroy letter; I don't knowabout the Garn letter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't make any difference--one or theother.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. Yes, that's a good idea--just to have it in thatletter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. We'll word it in the answer to:"What do you think of our report?" I can say that we take your reportso seriously that we are not going to meet the M1 target. I thinkthat's quite a natural way to handle it, if I can get it out in thenext couple of days, although one can argue about the timing and soforth. Okay, that's the way we'll do that. Do we have anything elseto do?MR. BERNARD. No. We're scheduled to be in Dining Room E at1:00 p.m.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Open Market Committee meeting is overthen.MR. PARTEE. How about that!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we agree that the next meeting is--MR. PARTEE. December 17.END OF MEETING-40-