Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 12-13, 1985A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 12, 1985, at 2:30 p.m. andcontinuing on Wednesday, February 13, 1985, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMs. SegerMr. WallichMessrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey and Morris, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City and Boston,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Kohn, Lang, Lindsey,Prell, Siegman, and Stern, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account-2-Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Jones 1/ and Teplin 1/, Economists, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Gainor and Garbarini, First Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Minneapolis and St. Louis, respectivelyMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. Balbach, Bisignano, T. Davis, Parthemos, Scheld,and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco, Kansas City,Richmond, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectivelyMs. Clarkin,FederalBoston,Messrs. Judd and McNees, Vice Presidents,Reserve Banks of New York, San Francisco, andrespectively1/ Attended portion of meeting on Tuesday and Wednesday related toconsideration of the Committee's longer-run objectives for monetaryand credit aggregates.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofFebruary 12-13, 1985February 12, 1985--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we can come to order, the first item ofbusiness is electing the Vice Chairman.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, after surveying the membership ofthis group and thinking of various outsiders who might[unintelligible] a change in the law, I conclude that I wish tonominate Gerald Corrigan as the Vice Chairman of the Federal OpenMarket Committee.MR. RICE. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That second came awfully quickly! Arethere any objections? I haven't heard any, so Mr. Corrigan is dulyelected and the Secretary will so record. We have to approve theminutes.MR. MARTIN. So moved.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I second that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Why are the reports onforeign currency and domestic open market operations separated [on theagenda]? We will go to foreign currency operations first, anyway.Are you prepared to report on domestic open market operations, Mr.Sternlight?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes I am. Sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll go to Mr. Cross first and yousecond.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion?MR. WALLICH. Sam, after listening to the conversations inBasle, would you get the impression that if sentiment on interventionis moving in any direction at all, it's moving in the direction ofdoing something more drastic--perhaps without the United States--[say], accumulation of some resources from interest and hitting themarket hard when the dollar is already declining?MR. CROSS. Well, it's very difficult to say what they mightdo. I would think that the desire, obviously, is very much to havethe United States: (a) take the lead; and (b) certainly, participate.Now, whether they will bring themselves to very large intervention inour absence--if we are out of the market entirely--looks prettydoubtful.MR. BOEHNE. What kind of money are they talking about?MR. CROSS. I don't know that anybody is talking about anyspecific amount of money. I think there is a problem in that the2/12-13/85operations that have been undertaken during this period--certainly onthe United States side on the occasions that we have operated--havebeen limited to fairly modest amounts. On one occasion it was $40million and on another occasion $48 million; the most we did was closeto $150 million. There certainly is a feeling that one needs to actboth in greater amounts and also with a greater forcefulness, as itwere. They understand the U.S. view about not wanting, as I said, tobash the currency; but they do feel that something needs to be done todeal with these exchange rates more forcefully than has been done.There was certainly some uncertainty in the market after the G-5announcement about what it meant. As time has gone by, that hastended to fizzle out and there has been the feeling that theintervention, while not insignificant, really hasn't been of aforceful and large nature, given the magnitude of the problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] go about intervention inthe least effective way--in fact, I would say a counterproductive way.You can follow up on--MR. WALLICH. Well, if I may pursue this a minute. Didn'tyou get the impression--I did myself--that the German intervention ofSeptember [1984], which was massive and to us appeared very heavyhanded and clumsy at the time, is regarded much more positively overthere as having been a really successful operation? Maybe that's[why] they seem to think it's the way to go--to wait until the dollaris softening and then push it down.MR. CROSS. Yes, I certainly think that. Absolutely. As atactical move, the German operation of September did introduce aconsiderable amount of two-way risk and uncertainty in the market. Itwas very heavy and it is seen as having been a very useful andattractive operation. Now, in subsequent times when they have takensimilar kinds of actions, they have not been as effective. But Idon't disagree with you. I think it had a very powerful impact on themarket; for some period of time it had the market wondering whether itwas going to be hit again one of these days. That certainlyintroduced a certain caution in the market and I would think that thatis a useful thing to do. There is certainly, on the part of some ofthe Europeans, a strong desire to see if tactics of that sort couldnot be used again with the same impact.MR. PARTEE. But it inevitably runs out of steam, doesn't it?Where was the mark then? What was the mark/dollar rate when they didall that intervention?MR. CROSS. Yes. It went up on the day that they hit it[hard]; at its height it was 3.17 and it went down about 4 percent.MR. PARTEE. And where is it today?MR. CROSS. It's at 3.29, but between September and Februaryit went up. It certainly was an element that introduced a great dealof caution into the market and I think it did have a lasting effectfor some period of time. On that day I believe they spent about $400million; we're not talking massive amounts in the billions that werespent. I think everybody is fully cognizant of the limitations ofintervention; in fact, maybe too much so. No one expects it by itselfto solve all the problems in Europe or here. But certainly there is a2/12-13/85view that, properly and forcefully used, it can be one additionalweapon that can be very helpful in keeping this quite troublesomeexchange market situation perhaps a little less volatile--I meanvolatile in the upward sense.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. On the other side of the coin,though, Henry, if nothing happens to the exchange rate, I think it ispretty clear that there's likely to be more pressure on interest ratesin a number of those countries.MR. WALLICH. Yes, that's the point that several of themmade.MR. CROSS. I think all, or certainly a lot, of the Europeansare going to be under upward pressure on their interest rates if theirexchange rates continue to depreciate.MR. AXILROD. Governor Wallich, if I may add a [different]and maybe minority view on that operation: I would tend to deny itssuccess. I think it was rather a hit and run operation and that thefailure of the dollar to go up--if that's a failure--subsequently, hada lot to do with the drop in interest rates in this country throughthe winter. And I think the expectation that that [decline] wascoming to a halt was instrumental in the dollar turning around. Whenit turned around and got to that point it just went right through it;it kept going, as there was no intervention of significant size anddetermination forthcoming at that time.MR. WALLICH. I'm simply saying that we took a negative viewof that operation; we viewed it as being contrary to good practice ofnot driving the rate but leaning against the wind. They seem to takea more positive view of it. And they seem to be of a mind to repeatit even though they know that they wouldn't get our cooperation on anoperation like that.MR. BOEHNE. Looking back over the last 4 weeks, if we aregoing to do something like this, what's the strategy of doing it theway we have done it? If we're going to do it, we ought to do it withsome conviction or it's hardly worth the trouble at all. It seemsthat we're intervening as though we're kind of being forced to do itand we really don't want to. Our intervention doesn't strike me asbeing very convincing to anybody.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you answering that question, Mr.Cross?MR. CROSS. I don't think anyone will disagree with whatyou've said. I think you're right: that we need to act moreforcefully if we're going to go in there, and show that we meanbusiness and that we are prepared to do something in other than tokenamounts.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are several cooks in this broth andsome are from rather provincial provinces.MR. GUFFEY. Just to follow that up: As we talk about ourintervention, how much control do we have over it at this point? Any2/12-13/85at all? Do we have any say, unilaterally, as to what the central bankwill do?MR. PARTEE. We [unintelligible] the central bank.MR. GUFFEY. Okay. It may be that unless others change theirminds we don't have any choice.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't operate unilaterally.Neither does the Treasury.MR. PARTEE. Is this episode about over, Paul? As I recall,on the [FOMC telephone conference] call you said it was [to last] fora few weeks. A few weeks have gone by. Has it terminated?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we're bound by that,particularly. Obviously, we haven't been acting effectively at all--MR. PARTEE. Not at all, recently. That's why I asked thequestion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --in the burst of the last couple of days.But I wouldn't say minds couldn't change [if] this [dollar] movementgets pretty strong. But I think it had better get strong enough sothat--. I personally am sick and tired of doing ineffectual things.I want to be effectual, or at least have a chance of being effectual.MR. FORRESTAL. Sam, do you get the impression that theBritish are going to resist pretty forcefully allowing sterling tocome into parity with the dollar?MR. CROSS. Well, resist? We're almost there. They areconcerned about the exchange rate. They have raised their interestrates by an enormous amount and they have a very soft economy. So inthat sense, they really have moved very, very strongly. They have notdone an enormous amount in intervention. They have done some, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have done very little intervention.MR. CROSS. --very little.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At one point they put their interest ratesup 4 percentage points. Do you consider that a strong action in thespace of about 3 days?MR. FORRESTAL. But the question was: How much further arethey prepared to go?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Up another 4 points? They may not beprepared.MR. PARTEE. How likely would it be that we would put oursdown 4 points?MR. CROSS. I think they feel that the 4-1/2 points that theyhave done is really quite a response to the downward exchange rate--2/12-13/85MR. WALLICH. Well, I think there is something to be said forwhat we've done so far. Yes, it would be better if we could operateeffectively; but after a long time of doing virtually nothing we'venow taken a few small, modest steps. It seems to me that that'ssomething one could build on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can see the essay now: "In Defense ofIneffectiveness."MR. WALLICH. Well, before you become effective you have tobe ineffective.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will accept that. You just gave therationale for what we've been doing: We have to go through this periodof ineffectiveness. Would you like to ratify these ineffectivetransactions?SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much of [the $6 billion leewayauthorized for the intermeeting period] did you use?MR. STERNLIGHT. At the maximum, $4.4 billion. It wound upat just $4.3 billion, but we had so much uncertainty, particularlyabout what was going to happen to Continental's borrowing, that Ithink it was useful to have that flexibility during the period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments?MR. PARTEE. Do you mean on the [leeway] recommendation [oron his report]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Either one.MR. PARTEE. Well, I wanted to ask a question of Peter.Perhaps everybody else in the room knows this, but I don't. Early onyou were talking about how you were running compared with thenonborrowed reserve path and you said that at year-end you were $300million above it.MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.MR. PARTEE. But then later you came closer to thenonborrowed reserve path.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Now, does that mean that the path called for a35% increase? We've had a very large increase in nonborrowedreserves. Or does it mean that you adjust that path week by week?MR. STERNLIGHT. The path gets adjusted as we proceed.2/12-13/85MR. PARTEE. So, unless we know what the adjustments are, wedon't really know what [unintelligible] an operation.MR. STERNLIGHT. The guiding principle in drawing the path isto accommodate required reserves and the estimated demand for excessreserves and then the allowance for borrowings that comes out of theCommittee's discussion. And if, as we proceed through a period, wefind that required reserves are growing more substantially, we foldthat information--when we get it--into a revision of the path. Mostof those revisions--MR. PARTEE. So, if you have strong monetary growth, you'llraise the path?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Okay. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless we increase borrowings.MR. PARTEE. Well, I understood him to say that it will raisethe path.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. STERNLIGHT. That would have been an alternative andcould come into the discussion also.MR. PARTEE. Well, I just thought somebody might misinterpretit when you said you came so close to path. One needs to understandthat you're constantly revising that for the larger growth [inrequired reserves], because otherwise one would think you wereshooting for a very large rise in nonborrowed reserves.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we're shooting to accommodate requiredreserves--MR. PARTEE. Whatever is called for.MR. STERNLIGHT. --at that level of borrowing.MR. PARTEE. On the [leeway] recommendation: I have noproblem with it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments?MS. SEGER. I just have a question. Hearing your commentsafter hearing Sam's, I wondered: How much coordination is therebetween the two--[the foreign and the domestic operations]? I heardyou talk about tilting, which would lead to a higher fed funds rateetc., and yet I heard [Sam talk] about the problems of the dollar andhow when rates ticked up the--MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there's close coordination in theoperational sense of Sam and his people being aware of what we'redoing each day and vice versa. And on something like the drawing ofthe paths--whether we're talking about up to $300 million with a biason the accommodative side or later modifying that bias--that is all2/12-13/85coordinated through conversations with senior staff here and ensuingdiscussions that keep the Board informed. Certainly, we are keepingthe Committee informed in our reports on the market: the morning calland the weekly reports.MS. SEGER. I guess what I'm saying is: If, as you saw thefed funds rate tick up you also saw a rather immediate impact in theforeign exchange markets, if we're concerned about a super dollar andwe're concerned about whether or not we're intervening enough, I justwondered if we ever close the loop or get any feedback in here?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, certainly we were aware of what washappening day-to-day on the dollar. And there were some individualdays when the strength of the dollar had a fair input into the timingof our operations--the decision of just when to go in to put reservesinto the domestic market.MS. SEGER. But it never made you think that it might beinappropriate to allow the fed funds rate to continue to move upward?MR. STERNLIGHT. No. I think that we did have some concernabout what was happening when funds were getting up to 8-1/2 to 8-3/4percent, and we [began] shaping our operations in a way that I thinkhelped to bring it down to 8-1/4 percent, though I wouldn't say thatthat was specifically a target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is not a complete answer, but thedomestic operation is very inflexible. They operate--MS. SEGER. I'm just trying to educate myself.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a good question. But [in thedomestic market, generally] we operate at 11:30 to 11:45 a.m. Once wehave made that decision [after the morning call], it's over. It's arevolution if we operate at 2:30 in the afternoon because at thatpoint if the market sees the funds rate going up, that raisesquestions about whether we're pegging the funds rate. So, it's aperfectly reasonable question. But the fact is that the opportunities--just on an operational basis--during the day to take account of[exchange market developments] are limited. If we miss it becausemaybe the market wasn't acting that way at 11:30 a.m., we've missedit. Now, maybe that's not the way we should operate, but that is theway we do operate.MR. WALLICH. If we have a money supply target and at any onetime in any one day we don't act--in order not to drive up the fundsrate because of what that might do to the dollar--then that has to bemade up some other day. Otherwise, we miss our target and it may thenmean a larger funds rate increase than if we had done it right away.We can't tell in advance.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may also find out after the fact thatit wasn't necessary to operate that day at all because the forecasthas changed. That's not unusual; I suppose there's a 50-50 chance ofthat.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If there were any systematic effort,as opposed to these issues of finesse, to place more direct2/12-13/85significance, say, to the exchange rate in terms of Peter's day-to-dayoperations, I think that's the Committee's decision, not Peter's--withall due respect to Peter. I think there is room for the finessefactor from time to time, and I think he uses it. But I interpretyour question as being a little more fundamental than that. I thinkif it's a more fundamental question like that, that's a decision wehave to make, not him.MS. SEGER. Just hearing the one presentation following onthe heels of the other made me connect the two.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A very good question. Are there any othercomments? If not, do we have a motion on this [intermeeting] limit?SPEAKER(?). So moved.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We need to ratifythese transactions.MR. MARTIN. Move to ratify.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No objection. Mr. Kichline.MESSRS. KICHLINE, PRELL and TRUMAN. [Statements--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm puzzled here. In July we projected areal GNP increase, 4th quarter to 4th quarter, of 3 to 3-1/4 percent?MR. KICHLINE. That is correct--for 1985.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, for 1985! Well, now is the time tocomment on the business and price situation. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. You have a near doubling--well, maybe not quitea doubling--of unit labor costs but very little increase in [the rateof] inflation. Is that the effect of offsetting factors?MR. PRELL. Governor Wallich, the unit labor cost increaselast year was 2 percent and, as I said, goes to 3-1/4 percent and thento about 3-1/2 percent next year. A quick inspection of that chartindicates that there has been a very large gap between price increasesand unit labor cost increases over the past couple of years. Theincrease in markup that has occurred is extraordinary in historicalterms; and we're basically just seeing a narrowing of this gap in theperiod ahead. The unit labor cost [increases] will still be running alittle lower than the price increases.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask you a question following thatquestion. In terms of these projections, we center on 4 percent forprices this year, which is an increase in the rate of price increasefrom last year. I get a little concerned about presenting price[projections] of an increasing rate of price increase--which show agreat faith in Federal Reserve policy--particularly when it's notclear to me why that should be. You have this decline in the dollarin your projection--I'm not talking about your projection; basically,2/12-13/85I'm talking about other peoples' projections--but I don't know whetherpeople assumed a decline in the dollar. Last time we used theconvention that we would not; I think we assumed some general range offluctuation within historical experience, which seems to me areasonable convention. It turned out to be a lot better, because thedollar was up, than if we'd assumed a depreciation. The actual priceresults have been at the very lower edge of our projections. And Iwonder why we're so pessimistic on prices this coming year when thewage trend looks good, the dollar continues to appreciate, the profitmargins have widened, as was suggested already, and the unemploymentrate doesn't go down much. One can argue about productivity; thestaff doesn't have terribly buoyant productivity estimates and maybeeverybody else is very low on productivity. But I would like to hearwhy [people think] prices are going to be worse this year than lastyear.MR. PARTEE. Well, it's very little. I have a 4 percentprojection and I guess I would say it's a much better projection thanI had at midyear for this year. There's only so far you can go!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your philosophy is to catch up to realityslowly.MR. PARTEE. Well, I also would be inclined to think thatthis rise in unit labor costs will have more effect on GDBP--pushingit up a little--than is shown in this chart. I don't think I wouldhave allowed for that kind of compression in the difference betweenunit labor costs and GDBP and I did have in mind some kind of adecline in the dollar.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Apart from the decline in the dollar, Ipresume over a long period of time unit labor costs go up the same asprices.MR. KICHLINE. I think the relationship is quite closelyconnected. I would say also, in response to Governor Wallich, thatour general view in looking at the price situation is that one wouldtake some standard measure of productivity and, in a sense, assume amarkup by corporations over some standard unit labor cost measure--sothat the cyclical gains that you get early on are rather quicklytranslated into additional profits. But this rise that we see in unitlabor costs we would not translate immediately into an attempt bycorporations to add on to that; rather, they would be taking a longer-term view.MR. WALLICH. At lower profits?MR. KICHLINE. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not a lower profit. There's no [change]in margins.MR. KICHLINE. Lower than if they priced higher. We had moreinflation with the same unit labor cost. We also had more profit, butwe have to stick that income somewhere.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My own interpretation of the priceforecasts, looking at the range of forecasts as well as my own, is2/12-13/85that I consider them basically unchanged. If you look at the deflatoron a fixed-weight basis, excluding food and energy, for the fourquarters ending in 1984 and the four quarters ending in 1985, it'sbasically 4 percent in both years. And when you look at 1985 asopposed to 1984, ending up with the same rate of inflation is betterin some sense because, if the economy behaves like the forecast, Ithink we're going to have at least some pressures from commodityprices over the next year. The dollar certainly isn't going tocontinue to go up; it probably will go down. But even if it stays thesame, people are not going to buy as much and we will get some furtherpressure on a year-over-year basis from unit labor costs. But Ipersonally don't interpret the forecast as saying that inflation isworse in 1985 than in 1984. It is either about the same or maybe alittle better.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm going to have a heck of a timeexplaining to the Congress that a number that goes up is reallyessentially the same or a little lower!MR. PARTEE. Tell them that it usually goes up quite a bitmore in the third year of an expansion.MR. BLACK. In the third year of an expansion that's reallynot much of an increase.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure as far as third years ofexpansions are concerned, but I don't see where we get any increase.I don't see why we don't have a decrease here, with what I see goingon.MR. MARTIN. I support the decrease-to-constant hypothesis,Mr. Chairman. We increased capacity by over 3 percent last year;there has been a surprising rehiring of experienced labor; and thereis all of this talk that we heard earlier about the use of computersand telecommunications equipment and all that stuff that made up theinvestment boomlet. Surely, these organizations are going to dosomething with this equipment other than look at it and display it tovisitors--which are two of the functions of this sort of newequipment. It seems to me that they will still have the pressure fromforeign competition and that finally someday, somehow, sooner orlater, the slimming down of many organizations that occurred--as thecharm school middle managers were sent on their way and otheradjustments were made in management and staff ranks--is going to havesome effect on labor costs in a positive direction. My own personalprojection was for less inflation--someone has to be an outlier--in1985, and I would support your statement of a constant or declining[rate of inflation].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to get the whole conversationgoing on this point. I think you might look at it again in the lightof an unchanged dollar assumption. Not as much as a lot of otherpeople, but we have been high on our inflation estimates before. Idon't know what prices are going to be, but there certainly will be arange of uncertainty. Maybe they will go up. The question is wherethe greater probability lies.MR. WALLICH. Could I ask a question on that? The greaterprobability is the number on a skewed distribution. Presumably, the-10-2/12-13/85probability distribution of inflation is that it can't go much belowzero but it can go up quite far; it has a long right hand tail. Areyou thinking in terms of the mode--the most likely single value--orthe mean, including the tail?MR. KICHLINE. We have alleged for years that we have a modalforecast. I would say that it's very difficult, but basically, if weuse the model and try to come out with confidence intervals, the modelcomes out with substantially lower rates of inflation. In fact, ifyou put a 70 percent confidence interval around our deflator estimate,a couple of times we drift out of that range on the high side. Sowith the same policy assumptions for 1985, the model forecast, forwhatever it's worth, is a rate of increase in the deflator onepercentage point less than in the staff forecast. I view thatinformation as saying that the risks tend to be skewed on the downside. We think 3-1/2 percent is the most likely outcome; but if we'rewrong, I'd say we're probably too high rather than too low.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I have a couple of questions, Mr. Chairman. Twoof the most difficult things to forecast, as you know, are what willhappen with the Federal deficit and what will happen to the dollar. Iwas just wondering if you did any sensitivity analysis in terms ofalternate forecasts, supposing that there's no depreciation of thedollar and supposing that there's no action to reduce the Federaldeficit.MR. KICHLINE. Ted, I don't know if we can run one with theexchange rate unchanged. You have some numbers on that there. We dorun one that has a fiscal assumption of no fiscal action at all, sothat would add $50 billion dollars, essentially, to outlays: $40billion in outlays and $10 billion of less taxes. In 1986, which isthe relevant year because we assume these fiscal actions take effectin 1986 and beyond, we get something like 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percenthigher real GNP--in the neighborhood of 4 percent or a little higher.The deflator in 1986 is only up a tenth or two but the momentum buildsas you get into 1987 and beyond. Short-term interest rates in thatscenario are about a percentage point higher in 1986 than those in thestaff forecast.MR. TRUMAN. On the dollar, taking not the fourth-quarterlevel but the estimate for the first quarter--which is a good deallower than we are now--as the jumping-off point, we don't get too muchdirect impact on either real GNP or prices from an unchanged dollar,since that [decline] is behind us. In the 3rd quarter, we get 0.2down in each and then next year we would get a larger impact of twicethat magnitude--an additional 0.4.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I wanted to ask a question about the debt todisposable income ratio. Your chart shows that ratio moving up prettyrapidly; it's probably near or a bit above the 1979 high. Do we knowwhat accounts for this run-up in debt? Is it due to demographicforces or what really accounts for it? And if that debt ratio staysat about the same level or goes up, do you think it's going to put aconstraint on spending in 1985?-11-2/12-13/85MR. PRELL. Well, we've been investing some special effortlately in trying to explain the behavior of debt. The majoringredient here is the consumer installment credit; its growthrelative to income has been so sharp over the past couple of years.There are a number of factors that seem to be at work. One, as Imentioned, is that durable goods spending has been exceptionallystrong, and that presumably is an area of spending that is relativelydebt intensive. Another factor is a rather mechanical one: For a yearor two after the period of credit controls, people seemed to be quitereluctant to use debt. [Credit] extensions during that period weredepressed and it takes a while for the higher level of extensionssubsequently to leave its full imprint on the repayment flows. Rightnow, and over the past couple of years, we've had a relatively lowrepayment flow from these past extensions, though we have a higherlevel of extensions currently. And as I indicated, in our projectionwe're expecting a catch-up as the more recent debt is what is mostlyreflected in the repayment flow. There may be some demographiccharacteristics involved here. Clearly, over the postwar period asthe population has aged, the younger generations have been moreinclined to use debt. There's some evidence of that over time andthere are a number of other minor factors. But this mechanical matterof extensions and repayments alone, according to some simulations wedid, seems to explain a great deal of that debt growth. We don't havedata anymore on extensions or repayments, but our inference would bethat a fairly normal pattern of debt usage relative to the spendingthat has occurred would have produced this acceleration and shouldalso produce a marked deceleration. As to whether it imposes aconstraint, the logic would suggest that those individuals who havedrawn upon their credit lines and so on and built up some debt mayhave some marginal constraint on their further spending. But this isa widely distributed debt. The evidence is that over the past severalyears it has been people in higher income brackets that have taken onmost of this additional debt. They presumably have more flexibilityand probably have more assets, so it should be only a limitedconstraint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I wanted to take exception to the[projections for] housing starts and residential construction volumefor 1985. As the chart showed, the mortgage commitment rate ishovering around 13 percent on a 30-year fixed-rate loan and theproportion of adjustable rate loans has dropped significantly. Idon't believe, given the satisfaction of the deferred housing demandthat has occurred to date, that we can reach 1.75 million [in housingstarts] or $166+ billion in residential investment in 1985. It couldhappen with a lower [mortgage] rate but the assumption of the staff isfor somewhat higher rates, particularly toward the end of the year.In the models I've seen, it would take a fixed-rate somewhere around12-1/2 percent. If you add the servicing on to that mortgagecommitment rate for 30-year fixed-rate loans you get about 13-1/4percent. So it seems to me that we're looking at 1.5 million ratherthan 1.75 million [on starts].There are a number of other institutional changes. We knowthat the investigation of the Bank of America mortgage-backed securityfraud situation is only beginning. There will be some investorreaction in the mortgage-backed security area. The thrift institution-12-2/12-13/85regulators are attempting to slow the growth [of such securities], andto the extent that there is some degree of success, that would affectavailability. And finally, there is the so-called willingness factorin home buying that is disappearing, in the sense that theappreciation motivation that has been so prominent over the lastseveral decades is waning in several regions of the country. Themotivation to buy is for shelter and not for appreciation. Thesyndicates have been pushed out of the market in the multifamily area;the multiple unit vacancy rate is terrifically high in some parts ofthe country. It isn't enough to do a macro job and get this very highvacancy shown on the chart. For the United States there isn't anational housing market; there is mosaic of sub-markets around thecountry; and many of those have very, very high vacancy rates. So Idon't see how we can get 600,000 or 650,000 in multifamily starts in1985. I suggest that the forecast is [.25 million] high. Thatdoesn't exactly throw the forecast out.I would couple that remark with a commendation for theanalysis in the rest of the structural forecast for the next year interms of real business fixed investment. I think it's a very goodanalysis, showing a very big cutback in structures in the realbusiness fixed investment area. I did a little work prior to themeeting and then found that I was caught in the sense that I was onlyverifying what the staff has done here. I think that's quiteaccurate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. On the business fixed investment chart I continueto be amazed by this very favorable red trend line that we've watchedthe last couple of years, which seems completely out of context withour experience. Mike, I think you did comment as you went through thecharts that most of that line, or a significant part of it, is in thecommunications/computer area. My question is: If you were to separateout what I would call for lack of a better term the "grunt stuff"--theheavy capital production type of equipment--from the computer area andthen, in turn, take a look at the part of that heavy equipment that isbeing supplied by the international market, wouldn't the line in factbe very, very different? And wouldn't that be a way of dramatizinghow terribly uneven all of this is, despite the fact that we have atrend line that looks very favorable?MR. PRELL. Well, I confess I have not done the calculationfor the residual component of producers' durable goods. It's a verylogical concept; I wish I had done it. This aggregate here includesoffice and store machinery, communication equipment, scientificengineering equipment, and photographic equipment. It is a prettygood piece--almost half--of producers' durable equipment. My sense isthat if you looked at the rest of the numbers, you would see a muchmore moderate advance. But as things progressed last year, we did seesome fairly substantial increases in the heavy machinery area and soon. There is the distinction between production and purchase of thisequipment. Clearly, the share of equipment sales that is going toforeign producers has increased very considerably. So the implicationfor domestic firms and the capital goods industry is one that is notquite as rosy as this picture.MR. KEEHN. Thank you.-13-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Didn't those figures you had the other daysuggest something like 50 percent of the increase in equipment wasimported this year?MR. KEEHN. I think it is higher than that.MR. TRUMAN. But the share this past year was about 25percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the share of the total?MR. TRUMAN. Share of the total.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You had a chart that had absolute numberswhere one could see the increase in imports and the increase in thetotal.MR. PRELL. Maybe I have those numbers. The figure we havefor 1984 was: total purchases of business capital goods excludingmotor vehicles rose $18 billion, of which $10 billion was foreign.And the overall penetration is about a quarter.MR. PARTEE. Wouldn't help things too much around Chicago,Si.MR. KEEHN. That's the problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Are you ready for more generalcomments?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me make a couple of more generalcomments. Our own view of the economy for 1985 is one that has realGNP growing about 4 percent, with the deflator a shade lower thanthat. And at this juncture, that has the characteristics of a goodforecast from my perspective. In the short run it could actually be abit stronger. The impression I get from talking to business peopleand others over the past month or so is that most of them have beenmarking up their projection of real growth and marking down theirinflation projection for the year. But I think there probably is aconsensus somewhere in the 3-1/2 to 4 percent range for both real GNPand prices.On the point that was just brought up, the feeling comes outvery, very forcefully in comments from directors and business leadersthat we have crossed the Rubicon on this external stuff and that itmay already be taking a bigger bite than even those numbers suggest.For example, who represents a very, very largemultinational firm heavy in capital goods, thinks that in recentquarters 100 percent of the increase in spending on equipment iscoming from abroad. Just within the past week he made some commentsto the effect that he had seen his order book affected in a verysizable way just in the past month because of the international tradesituation. So, that continues to be a wild card and it's gettingwilder by the minute. I have some of the same concerns that Pres had-14-2/12-13/85about the housing sector. It should be a good year, but there aresome things in there that I find troubling as well.Extracting from the traditional sectoral questions of whatthe risks are to a forecast, it seems to me that there are two orthree more generic risks that are particularly important in thecurrent setting. One of those is: What happens if interest rates goup in any appreciable way? Let me just define appreciable as morethan a percentage point in the short run. Obviously, that would be avery difficult situation. And then you ask yourself: What couldproduce that? If the budget deficit is not reduced, that couldproduce it; and if the dollar declines in any appreciable way, thatcould produce it even though the cushion for a dollar decline issomewhat larger now than it was before. That result could also comefrom the economy growing too fast because, from my perspective atleast, the balance in our credit markets is so precarious, asindicated in one of Mike's charts, that it doesn't take much to pushus into a situation in which the economy is growing too fast. Eventhough that might not reflect itself in price pressures, it couldeasily be reflected in interest rate pressures. Then, of course,there is always the possibility--perhaps remote at the moment--thatthe market could conclude that money growth in some broad sense isgetting away from us. So, there is a whole collection of things, anyone of which I think could produce pressures on interest rates. And Ithink it goes without saying that any appreciable pressures in thatdirection would throw any forecast to the wind.Another thing that I am somewhat concerned about in terms ofrisks is the burden of all this debt we're accumulating. I'm not assanguine as I thought you seemed to be, Mike, in terms of thecumulative effect of that debt burden--particularly in the context ofwhat I think is still some fragility in the financial system. And Idon't think all of these crazy new markets and instruments that arecoming along almost daily are helping that situation. Just to putthat debt situation in one perspective: Since 1982, the ratio ofnonfinancial debt to nominal GNP has risen by 17 [hundredths]. It'salmost a vertical line, and the level of that debt right now is so farout of line with anything we've ever experienced. That's just anotherway of looking at it that is troubling.The last thing I would mention on the risk side is the oilprice; that has been talked about a little. I was surprised the otherday when a point was made to me in a conversation with someone Iregard as a fairly credible source. The nature of the comment wasthat among a group of people thought to be experts, a third of themnow thought there was at least some possibility that the oil pricecould fall, say, to the $16 range. No one was predicting that as ahard prediction, but there was at least the recognition of that as apossibility by a fairly knowledgeable and sizable group of so-calledexperts. I must say when I stop and try to think about theimplications of that, I'm not sure what they are. They probably, ormost certainly, are not good. So, in general, I come out with [theview that] everybody is feeling good about the situation right now butgetting a little more worried about what the situation implies downthe road.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --more worried as you talked! GovernorGramley.-15-2/12-13/85MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think the forecast in many respects isa remarkably good one for the third year of a recovery--when growth inthe first two years was well above the average for the first two yearsof recovery and in the third year the expansion is sustained at a ratewell above potential growth and unemployment is reduced while keepinga low inflation rate and relatively stable interest rates. As Irecall--and I didn't look this up--this forecast for '85 is notdramatically different than what the staff presented for '85 a yearago and I swore then that it couldn't happen. But we're here now and,if you look at outside forecasts, a very large number of them arecentering on performance very much like this one. Indeed, when I putin my forecast, I found myself putting in numbers very much like whatthe staff has here.In thinking about uncertainties, what worries me the most iswhat's going to happen to the dollar. Lots of people worry aboutthat, too. Oddly enough, some people say if the dollar goes up, thatwill be bad for the economy and when you ask them what will happen ifthe dollar goes down, they say that will be bad for the economy, too.There are some bad things and some good things, but we need to keepstraight exactly what is going to happen if either of those twooutcomes occurs. I worry more--a lot more--about what's going tohappen when and if the dollar begins to fall than if it rises further.If it rises further, it will put some additional restraint on thegrowth of domestic production but it will have beneficial effects onthe inflation rate and beneficial effects on interest rates. And Ithink it is not too difficult to handle the negative aspects ondomestic growth by adjustments of monetary policy, even though I amworried about the kind of protectionist measures that develop [inthose circumstances]. If the dollar begins to go down and go downrapidly, particularly [unintelligible] as we're approaching thenatural rate of unemployment, it's going to stimulate the economystrongly. It's going to put strong upward pressures on prices and,through both of those things, strong upward pressures on interestrates. And that we're going to have a lot of problems with. So, Ihope the staff is right and we begin to get a modest gradual declineof the dollar beginning fairly soon.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sounds like one of the least likelyforecasts--not that anybody has any better one.MR. KEEHN. Just to comment generally on the outlook, thestaff forecast is really quite consistent with ours. Our GNP is alittle lower and our inflation is a little higher but not materiallyenough to comment on. But, as you can gather by my earlier comments,I am still just staggered by the continuing unevenness of it all.Many of the industries on the capital goods side are very weak and Ithink a lot of them have come to the conclusion that they are going tobe left out and that this recovery is going to completely pass themby. I was talking with a man who runs a very large diversifiedcompany, including an extensive foundry operation, and they haveconcluded that they had better get ready for the next recession andnow are in the process of closing permanently about half of theirfoundries. They just feel that that business is never going to comeback.A risk I would point out--and I would say it's a local risk,certainly not a macro or a broad risk--is this agricultural situation.-16-2/12-13/85I almost don't dare mention it because I'm sure I can't say anythingnew or surprising and you've heard a lot about it. But it is veryserious and is continuing to deteriorate. And it is one that I findvery hard to get a handle on; I find it difficult to measure just howdifficult and serious the problem is other than I have a hunch thatthe statistics we look at really don't adequately describe theproblem. The land surveys that we look at suggest that land valuesare down 30 to 40 percent from the peak. But there isn't much landselling; and when land does sell, it's selling at 50 to 60 percentunder the peak. People purposely are trying to hold land off themarket [because] the real values are substantially lower.As the land value goes down, the debt [unintelligible] willget very, very high at the agricultural banks. Cash flow just isn'tgoing to be adequate to service the debt. The concern among the agbanks is getting very high. I went to the Iowa bankers meeting inSioux City last weekend and I was pleased to get out of town in onepiece! They are pretty close-mouthed about the problem but they allcan see that the losses are going to be very substantial when theytotal the direct loans to the farmers and the indirect loans tosuppliers and merchants and the like. Also in the Midwest there hasbeen a lot of this trading of banks around that is supported by loanson bank stock, and I have a hunch that that will be a problem that'sgoing to grow in magnitude. When you add those together, I think thelosses on the portfolios are going to be very substantial. Anotherway of saying that the numbers hide the nature of the problem a littleis this: Of the 530 state banks in Iowa only 15 have capital of 7percent or less; and of those 15, 12 are between 6 and 7 percent,which would suggest that there isn't a problem from a capital point ofview. But when asset quality problems arise, a bank can go throughcapital awfully darn fast and all of a sudden there is an escalatingproblem. The Superintendent of Banks in Iowa suggests that about 140of their 530 banks are what he would call problem banks and by that hemeans that 60 percent of capital is classified. But he thinks thatnumber is going to go up and that by the end of the year about half oftheir banks will be in the problem category. These are all, I think,small banks and this is somewhat of a regional problem as opposed toone with broad national implications. But I do suggest to you thatthis agricultural problem--and, again, it can't be news to you--isserious and is escalating and that the number of bank failures isgoing to be significantly higher in the Midwest this year than was thecase last year. It is not at a level nor of the type of institutionthat could be destabilizing, but I think it is a risk that meritsnotice.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I've been in maybe a dozen meetings over thepast month and I think this is the gloomiest couple of hours I'vespent! Actually, the forecast looks like a pretty good forecast forthe third year of a recovery and it seems to me that it's a reasonableforecast. I think you can argue with it in pieces but, at least in mypart of the country, I find the mood more upbeat than I sense aroundthe table. There is a long list of things that could go wrong; eachone of them, certainly, could go wrong and 1985 could end up being adisastrous year. But it seems to me, if you're a betting person, thatthe outlook is really pretty good; and I don't see anything wrong withaccepting a pretty good outlook when it comes our way. Clearly, there-17-2/12-13/85are risks with the dollar and there are problems with agriculture andthere are other areas of risk. But on the whole I think maybe theFederal Reserve ought to surprise the country and not feel too badabout the outlook in 1985. So, I would be inclined to take theforecast more or less as it is, acknowledge that things could gowrong, but still present an upbeat kind of outlook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Miss Seger.MS. SEGER. First, in terms of the inflation outlook, I cameup with 3-1/2 percent without taking into account the value of thedollar; then Ted Truman convinced me that the dollar is going todepreciate so eventually I rounded my number up to 4 percent. If Ihad assumed it was going in the other direction, I would have roundedit down to 3 percent because I just do these in whole numbers; I don'thave the confidence that I can do it any more finely than that. Interms of productivity--and this is something that I'm very interestedin--one factor I think we're soft peddling, if not ignoring, in thiswhole productivity discussion is simply the commitment of businessmanagers to be more productive. I deal with some of the same kinds ofpeople that Si Keehn does out in the Rust Belt and they are viewingthis as a very high priority item. It's shape up or you're going tobe dead; it's as simple as that. Therefore, this has given them astrong incentive to be more productive. I understand that,unfortunately, that doesn't fit very well into the econometric models,but that doesn't mean it isn't a factor and that doesn't mean it isn'ta very important factor. Furthermore, I think this notion ties inwith what we're seeing in plant and equipment spending: that in orderto get the kinds of productivity gains they feel they have to have tocompete with the imports, they have to bring in state-of-the-artequipment. I just saw a plant on Friday that had robots all over theplace at $90,000 per unit. It's not a small investment but they haveto do this to improve their productivity. I think we're going to seemore and more of this even in offices; maybe not in Washington, but inother parts of the country they are having to be more productive.They are having to use word processors; they are having to stretchclerical help by giving them better tools. I think we have to paymore attention to this because, as Jim said, it is important withrespect to inflation possibilities and also to our growth potential.Finally, [I am concerned about] the continuing strong dollar,the agricultural problem that Si has already referred to, the thirdworld debt situation--I went to a meeting last week at the StateDepartment about the latter and that doesn't seem to me to be aproblem that has gone away--and the thrifts, which are still hangingon the edge of the cliff. Looking at all four of those factors, Ifind it very difficult to think in terms of interest rates going anyhigher at all, because I think that would push all of those problemsinto a still more serious mode. And heaven knows they are bad enough!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, I agree with Ed Boehne only more so. Ithink the staff is projecting a smaller real growth for 1985 thanwe're going to realize. I put in a 4 percent number and I thinkthat's a minimum; I really think we'll probably do better than that onreal growth. It's hard for me to document my position very well onthe basis of the numbers that have come in since our last meeting-18-2/12-13/85because they are a fairly mixed bag. But one thing that has impressedme in the past few weeks has been the extraordinary strength in thestock market. Since the 9th of January the stock market has put on adisplay of business confidence of a sort that is quite rare in ourhistory. I think that we're going to be revising up these real growthprojections and by midyear, say, I think that is going to put us in avery difficult position with respect to the effects of our actions oninterest rates. So, it seems to me that our problems in 1985 aregoing to be the problems of a very strong economy and they are goingto be just as difficult to deal with, and perhaps more so, than theproblems we would face if the economy came in weaker.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, we're in fairly close agreementwith the staff forecast for 1985 but with a couple of differentassumptions. One is that we [keyed] off the midpoint of the M1[objective] and projected 5-1/2 percent M1 growth rather than the6-1/2 percent that the staff has, and still came up with essentiallythe same numbers with the exception of the deflator; we would besomewhere in the range of about 1/2 percent higher on the deflator.The higher deflator number fell out of the unit labor cost componentof the forecast, suggesting that unit labor costs would go up morethan the staff has forecast. But in all respects, it would seem to methat we're going to get somewhat greater growth than the staff isforecasting in the first half of the year and somewhat less in thesecond half, largely because of the interest rate pressures that willbe brought to bear because of that greater growth [in the first half]and maybe some action by the Federal Reserve to move against that.I would also want to note for the Committee, as a follow-upon a comment of Si Keehn, that the condition of the agriculturalsector in the high plains of the Midwest is a very serious problem.It may not have the national impact, much as he has suggested, butthat does not mean that there will not be great social and otherdisruptions in that area. And indeed, it could get out of hand. Iwould also want to note quickly, having talked to the Farm Creditpeople, bankers, large input suppliers to the agricultural sector, aswell as to some Congressmen, that I fairly well concluded that thereis not a great deal that monetary policy can do to alleviate thatproblem, at least in the very near term--I'm talking about 1985 andquite likely 1986. I'm not sure that there is a role for thisCommittee with respect to taking action to try to alleviate theproblem that rests in the agricultural sector.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I'm inclined to join those who areprobably a little more optimistic than the Board staff, although Ithink the staff's forecast is very reasonable and I would be willingto accept it. As for concern about all of the problems, I feel muchas you did, Ed: I felt very good until I got here. Those problems areall there and they are all very real possibilities. I guess the worstof all worlds would be if every one of them really came to pass; maybejust one of them will. We will just have to wait and see what's goingto happen on the deficit problem. The dollar problem is pretty muchof an unknown, and depending on how that develops--or if some of thesethings happen--I think we would all be shifting our views entirely.-19-2/12-13/85On agriculture, I tend to agree with Roger: I really don't know whatwe, sitting around this table, can do there.In the discussion, someone mentioned the oil price going to$16 or $15 dollars a barrel. Several months ago, in discussing whatthe effect would be on our financial institutions if we got a prettygood drop in the price of oil, the feeling was that if the price gotto $25 a barrel, that was going to cause some very serious problems.Now that that is a very real situation, they are saying: "Well, whenit gets to $20 we're going to have some real problems." So, it's hardto judge just where that level is. I don't believe it's quite asdifficult at $25 now as they thought it was going to be--not that it'seasy; it isn't. And now they are thinking maybe $20 is where thedifficulty is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is the price $25 now?MR. BOYKIN. No. But I think it's becoming more and more ofa reality that it's going to get there. Therefore, in theconversations, the assumption is that it's likely to get there so theyquestion where the next down point is. But no, it's not there yet.Overall, looking at the situation today, I would certainly go forwardwith a great big smile on my face and keep my fingers crossed as Ikept going.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I didn't comment on the generalsituation earlier so let me briefly do that now, if I may. First ofall, I agree with the staff forecast; we came out very, very close toit. The only minor difference I would note is that, like some others,the shape of 1985 looks a little different to us than to the staff: wethink there will be greater growth in the first half than in thesecond. But generally speaking, it is a reasonable forecast and it'sone that I would be prepared to accept and one that I would beprepared to base policy on.In talking to people around my District, I sense that theconfidence level is very high; there is a good deal of optimism aboutthe economy. The private forecasters seem to be coming out prettymuch the same way on growth and inflation. I, too, came to themeeting feeling pretty good; but unlike a few of my colleagues, I'mnot particularly disturbed at what I'm hearing because I think thatthese problems are real. They are potential problems that I think wehave to keep very clearly in mind--not that they're necessarily allgoing to happen, but I think we would [ignore] those problems at ourperil. I think they are very real. I am beginning to feel in talkingto some people that there is a sense of euphoria beginning to develop.And, at least in my small sample, people aren't even talking as muchabout the deficit anymore. They have had in 1984 a very, very goodyear of phenomenal growth; they are looking at good growth in 1985;and these the problems of the dollar, the deficit, oil prices, andagriculture seem to be diminishing in people's minds. So, I think wehave to be careful to keep those problems very much in mind.The only other comment I would make is that I'm not so surethis agricultural situation is really a parochial one and not a macroone. We have it in our District, so now we're talking about the-20-2/12-13/85Midwest and the Southeast and perhaps the Southwest. And while thebanks that might be affected are small, the aggregate of dislocationamong the agricultural banks could be substantial. Again, while I'moptimistic, I think there are some dangers that we have to keep oureye on; but generally I would agree with the staff forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Except in prices, where you're much higheraccording to the--MR. FORRESTAL. We were higher? I thought we had 4.2 percentfor the GNP deflator.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 4.2 percent, that's it.MR. FORRESTAL. We had 3.6 percent for '85 over '84.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 3.6 percent in prices?MR. FORRESTAL. That's what I have.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not what I have on this sheet, butI'll take it.MR. FORRESTAL. Let me read my margin--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Don't read any further; 3.6 percent, yousaid?MR. FORRESTAL. Well, 4.2 percent is the deflator number Ihad [unintelligible]; I thought I had the 3.6 number in front of me.Is that correct?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll take it.MR. FORRESTAL. 4.2 percent, and year-over-year 3.6 percent.I had it right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff's projection iscertainly plausible and we can't quarrel much with it. I believe,like Frank Morris and Ed Boehne and Bob Boykin, that the risk is thatthe economy will come in somewhat stronger than that. Underlyingtheir forecast is the assumption that the income velocity of M1 isgoing to grow a little more than 1 percent. That may well be right,but to me that seems on the low side of what is likely to happen. Iwould think it is more likely that we'll have more growth in nominalGNP as a result of a faster rising velocity, and I think that would bedistributed partly between real output and prices. So, we come out at4.4 percent on those. So far as the unemployment rate is concerned, Iwouldn't be surprised to see that drop a bit lower than what weprojected originally or what the staff is projecting. I think thedemographics of the situation and improving real family incomes mightwell limit the increase in what the staff is projecting for laborforce participation rates and bring that down maybe a couple of tenthsof a percentage point below what they have.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.-21-2/12-13/85MR. PARTEE. Well, I'm inclined to agree with the optimiststoo. I think the short-term outlook is pretty good and the staffforecast is probably on the low end of what might occur in the nextyear. It has been shown pretty clearly now that what we had in thefall was a temporary stoppage in the growth and that growth has nowresumed at a pretty good rate. I have this view that the outlook isgood but the underlying situation is terrible. And the question is:Do we live in the short run or do we live in the long run when theunderlying situation may reveal itself? I suppose the greatestproblem that might occur would be a substantial increase in interestrates.MR. MORRIS. I think what you really mean to say is that thereal world is fine but the financial world is terrible.MR. PARTEE. Well, maybe that's what I'm affected by. Iagree with Jerry that a sizable rise in interest rates would be quitedifficult for these burdened sectors to take on. I don't agree withhim that a 100 basis points is a sizable rise. After all, rates aredown several hundred points over the last several months, but I guessI would agree that a 200 basis point increase would be a verydifficult thing. From my vantage point right now, I'm beginning tothink our greatest problem may be an excessive increase in activityhere that in fact will bring a 200 basis point increase in interestrates looking out 6 months from now. Therefore, I'm more on the sideof those who are now becoming somewhat fearful of too much of a risein activity rather than on the side of those who think it's going tobe too small in the period to come. In the end all these problems andmore that have been listed by Jim and others are going to come out insome way or other, but I think probably not in 1985.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I think as one looks at the evolution of ourprojections, it has been very favorable. Growth projections have beenupgraded and inflation projections have been reduced. I'm a littleuneasy about the inflation projections but there are reasons for them.When you take the absolute levels, the rate of growth is very close towhat we might consider potential and the rate of inflation is stillway above what it ought to be. The staff has it coming down in apretty satisfactory way; I doubt that [will happen]. In any event, Ithink there is much more to be done on that score.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the interest of accuracy, the staff hasit about the same as it was last year.MR. WALLICH. Oh! Hasn't it been coming down in recentprojections?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Their projections probably have beenreduced.MR. WALLICH. That's what I had in mind. Well, I have oneother comment. We're in the third year of an expansion and there isno reason why expansions should come to an end after 3 years. Butneither do I believe what the [Administration's] economic report says:that there is no relationship between the age of an expansion and thechances of it coming to an end. So I think the risks, as others have-22-2/12-13/85 -23-pointed out, are that something untoward may happen and may interferewith this reasonably good evolution. We have no serious imbalancesother than, of course, the terrible one--the budget deficit. But wehave a number of danger points, mainly financial. So, again, thereare potential sources of the evolution being disturbed. To me thissuggests that the risks are more on the side of excessive expansionthan of going down unexpectedly, and our policy ought to be[formulated] accordingly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. I think the staff forecast is a reasonable one. Iam impressed with the year-end business statistics, and for thatreason I agree with those around the table who are optimists and whofeel the odds favor a stronger recovery than the one that's built intothe forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are those year-end figures?MS. HORN. Well, we could start with the 4th quarter GNPnumbers and the auto numbers coming in strong. One of the things Iwas worried about at year-end was the buildup in inventories; I thinkthat is not so severe, based on the variety of numbers that I see.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the other hand, I raised the questionbecause new orders are down and housing is going no place on thelatest numbers, and there are real questions about the commercialconstruction area. Who knows? The auto figure looked good, as didthe inventory reduction.MS. HORN. The whole personal consumption expenditures, orthe consumer side, [looked good] and I tend to I focus on that. Inany case, looking at some of the assumptions that underlie myforecast--and I think a lot of the others around the table--one couldbuild a case for consumer and business outlays becoming stronger. Ifyou assume an expansive fiscal policy, no sharp changes in theexchange rates, no abrupt rise in interest rates, low farm prices,even lower oil prices, and so forth, I think you can build a case fora stronger recovery than the one that the staff is forecasting, and Ithink that's pretty close to my forecast. If the recovery isstronger, then the question about inflation comes up. I would see itnot spilling into the '85 numbers but be a danger in '86. And that,of course, requires either fiscal or monetary policy, or both, to dealwith it.In the Fourth District, the pattern of business activity issluggish with no particularly clear direction. But I can even put anoptimistic light on the Fourth District outlook in that there isreally a distinct change in mood, though it's probably short of Bob'sterm "euphoria." The impressionistic evidence we're getting hasreally quite a different tone to it. Of course, a lot of what we hearcomes from the strong auto numbers in both December and January, butwe're getting a lot of other stories. We've had no disappointment inretail sales in January, for example. We've had unexpected strengthin chemical orders and, to a lesser degree, in both heavy trucks andsteel orders as well. This is all recent and impressionistic ratherthan in the numbers. To keep from having a wholly optimistic reportto the Committee, though, I will say that the talk about protectionism2/12-13/85 -24-has increased--if that's possible--in the Midwest. You can't get twobusiness people in the Midwest together without that being thesubject, and I think that's a terribly serious danger as we goforward.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When do the retail sales figures come outfor January?MR. KICHLINE. 8:30 a.m. tomorrow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You could make a bold comment about them.Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, I want to make a comment on the generaloutlook. We're essentially in agreement with the staff forecast. Infact, our numbers are very close except that we're a little lower oninflation. We have 3.7 percent, mainly because we only expect a 4percent decline in the dollar rather than 8 percent, but we would onlybe half as wrong. I think the staff forecast is quite plausible and Ihave no quarrel with it. I do want to say, though, that I think ChuckPartee put his finger right on it: The aggregate statistics look greatbut an awful lot of the economy looks sour. I don't ever recall aperiod in which there was such imbalance in the economy as we'rewitnessing right now. We really have two economies going here; itdepends on what business you're in. None of our directors buys andsells GNP; they buy and sell other things. And if they are in thedefense business, or aerospace, or electronics, or in some capitalgoods industries, they are doing great. But if they are in mining,agriculture, forest products, and so forth, they're doing lousy. Toadd to what Bob Forrestal and somebody else mentioned--that theMidwest is not the only place where agriculture is in trouble--two ofour biggest banks are having problems right now and are undersurveillance, in large part because of bum agricultural loans. Justso you don't get the wrong idea on that, it's not only bum real estateloans. There are bum farm loans and big chunks of very bad realestate loans; even the agri-business [unintelligible]. At big banksin California agriculture is a problem. I agree with Bob that it isnot a local problem.It's time to be optimistic as we look at the aggregatestatistics and I feel optimistic in that sense. But only at ourperil, I think, should we ignore some of these other factors, whichsooner or later are going to come home to roost. Going back toHenry's remarks about there being no relation between the age and thehealth of an expansion, I would simply add that most expansions in myrecollection have come about because of a combination of inflationarypressures and rising interest rates. And those are the things thatright now certainly could trigger what looks to be a soundexpansionary trend and [turn out to] be unsustainable developmentsthat could quickly come to an end. I feel good about the generalprospects for 1985 and I'm beginning to wonder how much longer we'lllive with these big problems hanging over us. One or more of thoseproblems could push us over the cliff before 1985 is over, but I don'tthink that will happen. That's more likely to occur in 1986.MR. GAINOR. We've come down on the optimistic side of thestaff forecast: a little higher on GNP and a little lower on thedeflator. But those who have talked about the agricultural sector are2/12-13/85certainly reflecting our views. There are serious debt problems;collateral value is falling; and it has become a fairly hot politicalissue in our District and elsewhere, as you can imagine. There arebills in every one of our [state] legislatures to try to provide somerelief for the agricultural sector. Most deal with ways to moderatethe impact of debt service for the farmers. And, of course, one ofthe objectives is to provide some liquidity for spring planting--cashfor seed--which is a very serious issue. While we don't think it ismonetary policy's role to deal with this, monetary policy is not goingto be immune in that there is a great deal of sensitivity to interestrates. And if rates start to rise, I think perhaps some politicalpressure that currently is not on the Fed will gravitate toward us.So we are concerned about rates in that context.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If nobody else has anything to say, maybewe ought to have Mr. Axilrod say something about these targets fornext year.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We went over the question of whether torebase last month. You're aware that that is one of theAdministration's helpful proposals in its economic report andelsewhere. I detected very little or no--I don't remember [any]--sentiment for rebasing last time. You've had another month or more tothink about it. Maybe we can dispose of that issue quickly, if youhaven't changed your opinion. And if you have, let me know.MR. MARTIN. I think the Chairman's memory serves him well.I don't believe there was any overt support for rebasing. To startfrom some theoretical level being captured by a range we set some timeback has very little to recommend it, it seems to me. I would opposeany rebasing now, with all due respect to Bill Poole and his goodlanguage in the CEA report.MR. MORRIS. Also, Mr. Chairman, with the revised numbersthat we soon will be putting out, the deviation from the midpoint isdown to three-tenths of 1 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, no.MR. BOEHNE. No, it's more than that.MS. HORN. It's eight-tenths--5.2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, this change in--MR. MORRIS(?). [The midpoint] was 5-1/2 percent, wasn't it?SPEAKER(?). 6 percent.MR. MORRIS(?). The range was 4 to 8 percent, that's right.MR. BOEHNE. Aside from the numbers, I think Pres has madethe basic case and I would agree with him 100 percent on this issue.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I always have had problems withtelling someone we're aiming for a percentage rate of growth from some-25-2/12-13/85point we haven't reached, but I always have had sympathy for thesemoving lines around the midpoint rather than the moving megaphone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me get to that as--MR. BLACK. Well, that's part of the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm going to get to that issue too.MR. BLACK. Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're somewhat related, but let me seewhat--MR. PARTEE. I'd be opposed to rebasing.MR. BLACK. I am, too, as you currently define it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't hear any sentiment for rebasinghere.MS. SEGER. May I just ask a question? I haven't seen whatit would do to the numbers to have an average of the months for thepreceding year used as the base. I think that was one of theproposals that--MR. AXILROD. No, I thought they based it on the fourth-quarter average.MS. SEGER. I think they have it two ways.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they used the fourth-quarteraverage. But another question, which I have looked at myself at timesin the past, is why we put all this emphasis on the fourth quarterinstead of on a yearly average target. That's another way to do it.MR. AXILROD. Well, the growth for 1984 year-over-year was6.9 percent; fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter it was 5.2 percent,rounded. I could get you the level, but these things just tend tooffset each other; as you go back over the years they tend to averageout.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles, did you have some comment onthis point?MR. BALLES. Well, mine is the same as Bob Black's. I thinka good alternative to rebasing, which has its problems, is theflexibility [unintelligible] the parallel line idea that we've seen inthe Bluebook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me get to that in a minute. Itake it there is no sentiment to rebase. In fact, I don't think thatthis is an intellectually stupid way to approach it. It's a perfectlyreasonable thing to do, but I don't think there's any more reason torebase than not to rebase. It depends upon whether, on the basis ofthe year's events, we're happier to start out one way rather than theother way, depending upon some kind of an analysis. And that's theway I would explain it. But the convention is not to rebase, so the-26-2/12-13/85burden of proof is on changing it. In this particular year, if werebased M1 up I don't know what we'd do about M3. We'd have to rebaseit way down and have a peculiar explanation. The same is true forcredit, I suppose, if we took that seriously.MR. BALLES. I did have one comment, Mr. Chairman. You saidyou'd get around to the idea of the parallel lines rather than thecone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm getting around to it right now. If Iview the consensus accurately on the cones [it is not to] rebase.MR. BALLES. But my point is that if we don't rebase, weshould do something else or I think we'll have a big problem with M1appearing to be over its range for a good part of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, on this issue of how we draw thepicture I will declare my position: I have never liked cones. I wenton a little campaign a couple of years ago when the staff had palsy inthat they couldn't write these things without making a cone. But, onepart of the substance, anyway--in fairness, I don't think it's allthat the Council [of Economic Advisers] had in mind--is whether we aredisturbed that we are above the cone now. Now, this gets into theshort-run policy decision a little as well as the longer-run. But Ithink--MR. PARTEE. Growth has been pretty fast, if that's whatyou're asking.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not quite asking that. I'masking: Are you so unhappy that it's not so slow, having started inDecember above that cone as part of the low base, that you thought itwas important to get it back in the cone in January or February? Now,I would just assert "no." But that's certainly an interpretation; Idon't know what the Committee thinks.MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, I for one would agree withyou; I'm not worried. I would be worried, except for the expectationof the Board's staff--with which our staff agrees--that the velocityof M1 will probably be down in this current quarter and maybe for thefirst half of the year, and that it will be up in the neighborhood of1 percent for the year as a whole. That's an excellent reason to runabove path right now and maybe for a good part of the year. It isgoing to make us look a little silly every Friday in that chartshowing the level of M1 in relation to the cone for the year that TheWall Street Journal prints. The same thing is in the San FranciscoExaminer and heaven knows where else around the country. Those whodon't look at it carefully or don't remember all of your finetestimony, say: "Aha! The Fed is off the money [target] and isovershooting again."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Technically, it is literally true that theway The Wall Street Journal depicts the picture, they can write thatfor the week of December 31st we were below the midpoint of the moneysupply target and that for the week of January 7th--without any changein the money supply--we were above target. I don't think that makes alot of sense, but---27-2/12-13/85MR. PARTEE. Paul, when we use the parallel line, I think weought to be clear what the meaning is. If we are well above where thecone would be in the early part of it but below the top parallel line,I believe that means that the growth rate from there on until the endof the area covered by the parallel line has to be less than themidpoint of the cone. Isn't that right?MR. BOEHNE. Right.MR. PARTEE. So, it's really just cosmetic. It means that wehave to get a lower growth rate if we're above that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is literally drawing pictures, butpictures affect things. I don't know how we want to draw this. Oneway that appeals to me, but it's a really special case because I thinkit's more substantive--. If we just draw parallel lines, we have toask ourselves the question: Would we be particularly happy--right nowstarting off in the upper part of the parallel lines--to go down tothe bottom part, which is way below the cone?MR. PARTEE. That's a precipitous drop.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be quite a precipitous drop. AndI would argue--I think as a matter of substance, recognizing that allpictures aren't perfect--that we could just draw parallel lines andsay this is the way it looks with parallel lines. We could drawparallel lines and a cone. That's one way of handling this; we'vedone that once. We also drew a skewed one once. I think it has somemeaning to say that we have the points in the fourth quarter of thisyear, which are established by the basic target, whatever that is. Westarted out above the cone because it was coming up, largely inJanuary but in December too. We probably don't contemplate--orwouldn't be really happy based upon anything we know now--going belowthat lower line in the cone. And we could draw a line up from thatpoint in the fourth quarter back to the upper part of the range in thefourth quarter of this year. The result would be a truncated cone; Ithink that would be the mathematical expression. And it would be, Ithink, a substantive portrayal of the area in which we might like tobe. But it's just one way of drawing the picture.MR. GUFFEY. Would you describe that again?MR. PARTEE. Just fill in the top of those lines?MR. GRAMLEY. It looks a bit like a whale, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Draw a line from the fourth-quarter targetof this year to the fourth-quarter target of next year. That's aline.MR. PARTEE. Oh, I see.MR. GUFFEY. And then draw a cone off of the fourth-quarteraverage? Would that be the point?MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] look at it in these terms.-28-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you do it that way, the bottom linesare the same as the cone. Well, look at M2 here. It does not lookvery different from that; that top dotted line there would be a littlehigher.MR. PARTEE. It would be a little higher at the beginning.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At the beginning, yes.MR. GUFFEY. Isn't that essentially rebasing?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're ending up in the fourth quarterjust where you would end up anyway.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. You would start the top parallel line where the8 percent is? Is that how you would do it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, not at the end of the year. I wouldstart it in November.MR. BOEHNE. All right, at the end of November. And you'regoing to call this a truncated cone?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not going to call it anything. Iwould describe it to the [Congressional] Committee as a reasonablepicture of the general zone in which we'd like to be as the yearprogresses.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, are you aware that there's a brandof golf balls that has truncated-cone dimples?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, I think I drew a picture likethis once without consulting this Committee. I was probably using itin testimony.MR. BOEHNE. So, this is sort of half rebasing and half not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it's--MR. PARTEE. No, it's not really rebasing.MR. MARTIN. It's not rebasing.MR. PARTEE. It makes a lot of sense, actually.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it recognizes that we wouldn'tdraw it that way unless we wanted to convey a notion that we wererelaxed about being above this cone for a few months, or for the firsthalf of the year or something.MR. MARTIN. Under other circumstances one might draw thegeometry the other way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other way. I think it depends uponthe substantive decision as to what kind of policy we want to---29-2/12-13/85MR. MARTIN. It conveys it a lot better than a geometricallyneutral form, if you would.MR. PARTEE. Are you talking about that for all the Ms oronly for M1?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For M2 we might just draw the parallellines, I suppose.MR. PARTEE. They're definitely pretty close.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's so close it makes practically nodifference. For M3, I don't know what you want to do. We can drawparallel lines, I guess, and a cone. Mr. Sternlight, I have a noteindicating that you wanted to talk.MR. STERNLIGHT. No sir.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we have to decide just atthe moment, but we have to talk about it and decide when we come tothe decision on what the targets should be precisely and what to sayin the directive. We can just do it. One way of finessing this,which we did once, is to draw the parallel lines and the cone--whichis what the staff has there.MR. GUFFEY. Have both.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, we could just draw theparallel lines.MR. GUFFEY. Have both.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm pretty [easy-going] about all this.It doesn't--MR. GRAMLEY. If we have both, you can do the kind of shadingyou want with words; and you'll tell a lot more about what our thrustin policy is than in any kind of picture we can draw. If we draw thisstrange looking picture, you're going to spend about 6 pages of yourtestimony trying to explain to Congress what that crazy thing is. Ifwe draw both the dotted lines and the cones and then you say "Look, westarted off rapidly--"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Wall Street Journal won't know what toput in their article! They'll have to reprogram it.MR. GRAMLEY. I'm not sure I could figure out whatmathematical equation would describe that animal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not a mathematical equation; it's apragmatic line.MR. PARTEE. Joined at the top of last year's range is thetop position.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Besides, it's probably not just atruncated cone but---30-2/12-13/85MR. PARTEE. The end of the year.MS. HORN. The top of the midpoint of the fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A skewed truncated cone, with differentslopes on both sides.MR. MARTIN. The Volckergram!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's also the question of what weightto put on M1. But it's getting late. I don't know whether there issome spontaneous consensus on the range itself. We can decide ittomorrow morning unless a spontaneous consensus emerges. If I recall[our discussion at the December meeting] correctly--though nobody isbound, obviously, by what he or she said last time--in a vague way thepredominant support was for alternative II but there was some supportfor something that would look at least partly like alternative I. Idon't think anybody was arguing for alternative III, although somebodymay have said that the ranges should be tightened. I don't know; Idon't remember that closely. Nobody is bound by that anyway. We'llnarrow it down anyway. Is something less than alternative II in theballpark?MR. MARTIN. I join President Balles in the caveat that, tothe extent that alternative II is beginning to emerge as a consensus,I think we may have pragmatic difficulties with the upper bound of M1.Given the staff forecast of income and interest rates, their warningthat the projections on velocity have some confidence limits aroundthem, and given the lagged effect of the interest rate drop that we'vehad, V1 could even be a little negative next year. If we're going foralternative II--as I hear you, John--it seems that we ought to dosomething about the upper boundary for M1; 7 percent may be too low.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't--MR. WALLICH. Well, I don't see the setting of these targetsas a means of accommodating the economy. We're setting the targets soas to shape the economy.MR. MARTIN. I'd like to see us shape the economy with a 4percent real growth rate, Henry.MR. WALLICH. Well, that's not my objective.MR. GRAMLEY. If you look at where our projections were lastJuly when we first set these targets versus where they are now, themedian forecast for real GNP looks like it might be half a percent orso higher than it was then. For the GNP deflator it looks like themedian forecast is going to be about 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent lower.So, we have more real money balances assumed and a larger real GNPgrowth and it seems to me that we would have a heck of a timeexplaining to anybody why we raised the targets for money growth. Ithink we could sit with these.MR. MARTIN. Lyle, we're not raising the targets; we'relowering them by 1/2 a point for M1. I would suggest 7-1/2 percent togo along with the 8-1/2 percent on M2. That would be taking the upperlimit 1/2 point [above the tentative target] and a 1/2 point [below-31-2/12-13/85the target] the year before. It gives us a little room. We'retalking about being around the upper limit of each of those ranges.MR. GRAMLEY. It's room I don't think we need. And I thinkwe send the wrong kind of signal when, after having set these targetsinitially, we're forecasting more real growth and higher growth ofmoney balances with the lower GNP deflator. I don't see that we needthat additional freedom. And I would prefer to send a signal whichsays: "Look, we're still concerned with bringing down growth of moneyand credit over the long run to bring down inflation."MR. MORRIS. I think there's a good argument for not changinganything in that we don't have the faintest idea what the velocitiesare going to be anyway. Therefore, why not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we're going to shape the economyanyway.MR. MORRIS. And I don't see any point in changing the debtrange because, historically, an 8 to 11 percent range for debt gives alot of room for 8 percent nominal GNP growth.MR. PARTEE. It just hasn't in the last few years.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this may be a little side issue. Itdidn't last year and maybe the year before; I don't remember. But Iwas a little struck too when somebody--Mr. Axilrod, I guess--saidthat, obviously, we can't lower that unless we're going to saysomething about all these mergers and so forth. Why is the analysisso certain that what we have for nominal GNP growth--7 or 8 percent orwhatever--is going to produce 11 or 12 percent debt growth when that'sout of keeping with 90 percent of history? It is not last year'shistory, I agree; but what is the analytic background? Is it thedeficit? Is it a high deficit that produces that? I don't know.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, because if it were 8 percentnominal GNP growth, particularly in a more mature stage of thebusiness recovery, normally the deficit financing this percentage ofGNP would be down. I think that's why the predicament of this overallcredit market situation is so hard to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What you're saying may be true; I'm notsure what it is--that the dollar of government deficit produces moredebt than the dollar of private deficit?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, I'm saying--MR. MORRIS. If there is a difference from the historical[experience], it's the fact that our total expenditures are runningsubstantially above the GNP.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's one reason.MR. MORRIS. Therefore, you could argue that you need moredebt. But don't you also need more money? Why do you need more debtand not more money to finance a greater level of expenditures? It'snot immediately apparent to me.-32-2/12-13/85MR. BALLES. Velocity is down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're throwing out two questions tothe staff now. We'll get a response and go home. Maybe it's--MR. RICE. Well, maybe part of it--MR. AXILROD. The staff was tempted to suggest throwing awaythe debt variable as not being useful.MR. BALLES. I second that.MR. AXILROD. President Morris mentioned one thing. In someresearch we've done, the debt does seem to run a little betterrelative to total spending than it does to GNP. So that gives you apercentage point. Last year we thought the mergers and acquisitionsadded about a point. I threw in a quarter of a point for theacceleration of state and local government borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's 2-1/4 points.MR. AXILROD. I think you can throw in another tenth or twofor those HUD notes that came at the end of the year. I didn't throwthat in there. I personally believe that the government deficit doesget you greater credit growth relative to GNP, though it's a littlehard to find it in the data. Of course, we haven't had so many yearswith these big deficits. You can base it partly on the grounds thatthe government does [not] really have the option to finance itself by(a) issuing equity or (b) drawing down assets. Now, the private[sector] can't draw down assets forever, but they have that [option]as well. So, we really have reduced the credit growth by roughly thesame amount as we reduced nominal GNP. When we worked through thewhole flow of funds, we had a hard time getting any less credit growththan that, going through it sector-by-sector and taking all thesethings I've mentioned into account. I think we have about 1/2 pointor so in there for mergers and acquisitions. That would be myresponse. I don't know whether Mike or Jim has anything to add tothat.MR. PRELL. We had some discomfort about the overall debtgrowth relative to GNP. But we also know, as President Corriganpointed out, that we have had this very strong trend over the past twoyears. In arithmetic terms it seems to have been related to thisunusual Federal borrowing, and that will continue. We just couldn'treally find the basis--in terms of a set of credit flows consistentwith our sectoral picture and the GNP forecast--for squeezing out muchmore debt in the household sector and the business sector. I mustunderscore that the assumption we made about mergers and acquisitionsand so on is rather arbitrary. We don't see the pattern clearly yet,and it's not inconceivable that we could get a larger amount.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to clarify it in my mind: What wouldyour straightforward projection of debt be consistent with your wholemodel and whatever mergers and acquisitions you allowed for?MR. AXILROD. 11.7 percent.-33-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 11.7 percent, which includes 1/2 point formergers and acquisitions.MR. AXILROD. Roughly.MR. PRELL. There's no model; this is purely judgmental.MR. KICHLINE. And that's 2 percentage points less than ayear ago.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But with a lower GNP.MR. KICHLINE. It was 13.6 percent in 1984.MR. PARTEE. And 2 points less in the GNP growth.MR. PRELL. It's a comparable excess over GNP growth.MR. KICHLINE. Let me make one comment on the Federal side.I was looking at the numbers back in the 1975 through 1978 period; in1978 Federal debt was growing at under 10 percent--more like 9percent. This time, in 1985, we are still facing 15 percent rates ofincrease. We have come down from 19 percent to 17-1/2 percent to 15percent. Those are very large numbers to deal with and see the totaldecline.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes. And even in 1975, on thatchart we had earlier, the big spike in government borrowing wasaccompanied by a corresponding downward spike in private borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what you'd think might happennormally. Well, let's stop for the evening unless somebody hassomething further they want to say.MS. HORN. Have you heard anything about transportation tothe Embassy tonight?MR. BERNARD. There will be cars at the hotel at 7:15 p.m.[Meeting recessed]-34-2/12-13/85February 13, 1985--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were in the midst of discussing theselong-range targets, but maybe we can interrupt that for Mr. Kichline'sreport on the only new economic news we got overnight. Why don't youinsert that at this stage?MR. KICHLINE. We have the advance retail sales number forJanuary, which is that total sales are up 3/4 of a percent. But therewere downward revisions for both November and December. The group,the so-called retail control--excluding autos and gasoline stationsand nonconsumer sorts of things--was down 0.4 percent in January.More importantly, December was revised down to minus 0.2 percent; ithad been plus 0.6 percent. And there was also a downward revision inNovember. Basically, the staff had assumed monthly increases ofaround 0.5 percent in the first quarter. That would have put theJanuary level of this so-called retail control about 1.5 percent abovethe fourth-quarter average. Taking these numbers as they now stand,January is 0.1 of a percent below the fourth-quarter average. So,these numbers are appreciably weaker. Who knows what they will be 3or 4 months from now when they're revised? But this is certainly nota bullish report.MR. PARTEE. Was the November revision significant too, Jim?MR. KICHLINE. Yes. For total sales they had been showing a2.0 percent increase; it's now 1.5 percent.MR. PARTEE. I see.MR. KICHLINE. For this retail control, it was up 1.6 percentand it's now up 1.3 percent.MR. PARTEE. So, it really has drifted quite a lot lower.MR. KICHLINE. Correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were discussing what the long-rangetargets should be. I think the conclusion has been reached not torebase, though some imagination in drawing lines may be desirable. Wewere on the subject of what the targets should be. There was someexpression that they ought to be the way they are in alternative IIand some expression that at least M1 ought to be a 1/2 percentagepoint higher on the upper end. There was one expression of that view.Does anybody else have anything to say? Mr. Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, given the forecasts that we've made--noting that nobody expects real growth less than 3 percent or inexcess of 4-1/2 percent--I think alternative II looks very good. Itseems to me that the ranges proposed for M1 and M2 would accommodategrowth within the range of 3 to 4-1/2 percent. I'm quite comfortablewith a range for M1 of 4 to 7 percent and for M2 of 6 to 8-1/2percent. I could live with the proposed ranges for M3 and totalcredit, but I would prefer to see M3 raised 1/2 of a percentage pointto 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent and credit at 9 to 12 percent. We expect M1to come in near the upper reaches of the range. And while we hopethat M3 will also be in the upper part of the range established, wehave this experience of M3 running very high. And I don't see why we-35-2/12-13/85should not set the ranges so that M3 will be at least closer, if notwithin, the range. The main objection to that seems to be that thiswould transmit a signal to the public that we are not beingsufficiently vigilant or, in the case of total credit, that we'retrying to accommodate the deficit. I myself am not impressed withthat argument. It seems to me that the public cares most of all aboutM1 and, to some extent, M2. But I don't believe the public would bealarmed if we recognize that M3 is tending to run very high relativeto its range as it has in recent months and that we allowed for thatby increasing the band to 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent. I would favor alsoa range for total credit of 9 to 12 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Refresh my memory, Mr. Axilrod. Do yourtechnical gnomes think that M3 is [more] likely to run high relativeto its range than M2?MR. AXILROD. I think the difference in our point estimatesis trivial. Our point estimate for M2 is around 8 percent and ourpoint estimate for M3 is close to 8-3/4 percent. I would say that thebest way to think of it is that M3 looks a shade closer to the upperend than M2, but I would have some doubts that M2 will run quite thatlow--MR. RICE. But, Steve, doesn't that depend in part on theassumption of higher interest rates as the year goes on?MR. AXILROD. That's right. We have a slight drift up ininterest rates, which was--MR. RICE. But your assumption that M3 will stay within therange is based on your expectations that interest rates will--MR. AXILROD. Yes. I would say that's equally important toM2.MR. RICE. It may not happen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I would prefer the rangesactually adopted in mid-1984, although I'm a little agnostic on someshading of those targets insofar as they pertain to M3 and totalcredit. But, in particular, I would not want to see the M1 range for1985 different from the 4 to 7 percent. If M1 were at the top of thatrange, at 7 percent, that would permit an 8 percent rise in nominalGNP with only a 1 percent increase in velocity. And that's notunusual, even for the third year of economic expansion. On the otherhand, if inflation could actually be lower than 4 percent or so--assome people suggest--then that kind of a result could occur with evenless than a 1 percent increase in velocity. More importantly, if itworked out during the year that velocity wasn't growing at all but wasdeclining, I think it would be a heck of a lot easier to adjust inthat direction--even if it meant being above the range, which I thinkis unlikely--than to have to adjust the other way. [By other way, Imean] having money growth at 7-1/2 or 8 percent, which would still bein the target range but in a context in which it turns out thatvelocity is increasing and nominal GNP is growing too fast. So, Ifeel somewhat strongly about that one in particular. In general, I-36-2/12-13/85prefer something like alternative II or the ranges we adoptedtentatively in July--again with some agnosticism on credit and M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I would echo Governor Rice'scomments with regard to the understandable shift in our views towardthe probability of a bit stronger growth. It seems to me that in ourdiscussion yesterday, something like half of us were talking aboutgrowth of 4 percent, or at least higher growth than the staffforecast. It's obvious also in the tabulation done for the July[Humphrey-Hawkins] Report to the Congress vis-a-vis our most recenttabulation that there has been a shift of 1/2 or 1/4 percentage point,or something of that magnitude. That says to me that there is astronger possibility than existed before that M1 growth for 1985 willnot only run above the 6-1/2 percent but that it could easily run 7 or7-1/2 percent. We still don't know what the lagged effect will be ofthe drop in short-term rates which, after all, was a very substantialdrop. It hasn't worked its way through and we don't know what thatwill do to velocity. And we can't escape the din of news with regardto the strength of the dollar and the [unintelligible] that's in thatnews from time-to-time of almost a scramble for dollars in this orthat market. It seems to me that we easily could have a 7-1/2 percentrate of growth in M1, which would be consonant with a favorableinflation outlook and export performance. Regardless of the geometrythat we're presenting on this and that The Wall Street Journal ispicking up, the implication at least is that M1 will be running abovethe 7-1/2 percent level and that there will be implicit or explicitpressure on us to adjust.I favor [an upper limit of] 7-1/2 percent with some commentswith regard to some of these matters that have developed since July.Goodness knows, there have been enough developments of substance sincewe reported to the Congress in July to risk breaking a precedent! Myunderstanding is that we don't change these outer boundaries of rangesof monetary aggregates once they are set; I don't see why we should beconfined to that kind of a pattern. I suggest that we use 7-1/2percent [as the upper limit] for M1. I think some of the samecomments could extend to M2. It may run at or above the upper limitthat we set in July. The 8-1/2 percent doesn't seem to be asimportant in the way the market looks at the monetary aggregates. Wehave to think of how they--the traders, the market makers--think. Iwould extend that even more so to M3 and to total credit. I'm notready to jettison total credit as was suggested yesterday. Obviously,we don't seem to be gigged in the market and in the market commentswhen we exceed the latter two broader measures. So, I would opt foran upper limit of 7-1/2 percent for M1 and leave the other threeranges where they are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what historians we have here.How much have we changed these ranges? Do we never change them? We[unintelligible]--MR. AXILROD. We have changed the tentative ranges. We haveto check back; we can do that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have, but not very frequently.-37-2/12-13/85MR. AXILROD. We'll check back on it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I think there's a lot to be said for the 4 to 8percent range on M1. My particular point estimate is 8 percent onnominal GNP, and if we have the 1 percent increase in velocity thatthe staff is predicting, that will result in a 7 percent [Ml] growthrate, which would be consistent with that. That's at the very upperend of our 4 to 7 percent range and a 4 to 8 percent range gives us alittle room. And it seems to me that it's more likely to fit suitablyin a year which--if it comes out as we are projecting it--producessuitable results of 4 percent or thereabouts on real growth and 4percent or maybe a little less than that on inflation. I don't seewhy in advance we should show some inclination to try to screw down onthe economy with this kind of a prospect. I also think it would lookgood from the standpoint of the public because we're saying: "Look,inflation has developed quite a bit better than we expected."Although it's not zero, as Henry keeps pointing out, it looks likeit's going to be a quiet period and we don't want to stop the economyfrom having reasonable growth. Therefore, since the problems haven'tmaterialized that we were beginning to anticipate when we cut thatrange back in July, I think there's a lot to be said for putting itback where it was before, at 4 to 8 percent. It could be played verywell. Therefore, I think that's what we ought to do.I don't think we ought to get into some kind of a box onthese other Ms because we're trying to be tight about everything. So,taking 4 to 8 percent for an M1 range, I also would take the rest ofalternative I for M2 and M3. Maybe total credit ought to be 9 to 12percent rather than 9-1/2 to 12-1/2 percent, but I see nothing wrongwith that in the context we're talking about. Now, if our forecastturns out to be seriously in error, that upper limit will give us aconstraint. If more inflation begins to develop, we'll start to popover the upper limit and that will be the basis for snugging up in themarket. On the other hand, if the staff is wrong on velocity and itgoes up 2 percent or 3 percent rather than 1 percent, there's noreason we can't fall below the 7 percent normative number that I havenow in my forecast and take 6 or 5-1/2 percent. That's within therange we're talking about. So, I think the 4 to 8 percent range fitsvery nicely with the economic circumstances that we're talking aboutfor this particular year, and I would support that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Velocity went up 4 percent last year. Mr.Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I come out in a different placethan most of the others. I think we've done remarkably well withmonetary policy the last year and a half, so far as M1 is concerned inparticular. We've about hit our targets right on the button; we werea little off last year, but not a great deal. Accordingly, I thinkit's important that we continue this progress that we've made and Iwould go with alternative II. I accept the staff's suggestion that weincrease the monitoring range [for total credit]. But I wouldstrongly prefer that we omit any reference to coming in at the toppart of that [M1] range. If we hit the 5-1/2 percent midpoint, that'sa little pickup from what we had this past year: and with the economystill apparently strong, I just don't think any useful purpose would-38-2/12-13/85be accomplished by suggesting that we were aiming for the top portionof the range. I think it might undermine some of the progress we havemade in increasing our credibility in the last year and a half.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I too would prefer to see M1remain in the 4 to 7 percent range for the reasons that have alreadybeen expressed. And I would add just two. First, I think thatinflation expectations are better than they have been in the lastcouple of months and, therefore, we'll have more rapid growth in realbalances that will give us a little more leeway at the top end of therange. Also, to raise the M1 range to 4 to 8 percent at this timewould express more concern about the economy than our projectionswould seem to indicate. I just have a feeling that moving it to 4 to8 percent at this point could very well send the wrong signal to themarket. For that reason I would prefer to keep the range where it iswith the expectation that we probably would come in at the top of therange in any event. I think M2 also should follow the specificationsof alternative II. With respect to M3, I have a slight preference formoving the range up to reflect the reality of the situation that we'vehad over the past several months, and I would suggest a range of 6 to10 percent or perhaps 5-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M3. I think totalcredit perhaps should be widened also, say, to 8 to 12 percent,although the 8 percent is probably not a very significant number. ButI think we need to move the top end, again to reflect what actuallyhas been going on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else have any comments?MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I also support alternative II andthe 4 to 7 percent range for M1. There may be reasons--Chuck and Preshave talked about some of them--why M1 indeed probably would come intoward the top part of the range. Nonetheless, with the uncertaintiesthat we face--[the age of] the recovery, velocity, exchange rates, andso forth--I'd like to see discussion in the presentation of theseranges that is a little more symmetrical. While it certainly wouldrefer to the top half of the range, I'd favor some discussion aboutthe uncertainties and what kinds of things might have us choose tocome in at the midpoint or even lower as the year progresses. Theother reason that I favor the 4 to 7 percent range is that I think thestatements about our long-term disinflationary goal sometimes getburied as we talk about some of the more immediate kinds of problemswe have. And I think it would be a good place and a good way torestate the long-term goal that we have.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. As far as M1 is concerned, I'd be inclined tosplit the difference between alternative I and alternative II. Ithink we do have a reasonably favorable outlook for 1985 in terms ofreal growth and inflation. And I think we ought to take favorablethings as they come along and not clamp down. Alternative II is justtoo snug a fit as far as accommodating what seems to me a pretty goodoutlook; we need a little breathing room at the top. Also, I wouldremind the Committee that 7-1/2 percent is not an increase; it's adecrease over what the range was for 1984. I agree there is somethingto the long-run goal of ratcheting these numbers down. But our goal-39-2/12-13/85was 4 to 8 percent last year; it was not something less than that.So, it seems to me that splitting the difference gives us theadvantage of paying some allegiance to our longer-run goal ofratcheting these numbers down while at the same time providing somebreathing room to accommodate what I think is a fairly favorableoutlook.MR. AXILROD. As it turns out, Mr. Chairman, it's more usualto change the tentative ranges than to adopt them. Of the fourrelevant years--1981 through 1984--only in 1982 were the tentativeranges agreed on [in July] adopted [the following February]. In 1981,1983, and 1984 they were changed in varying ways. In 1983 there was asubstantial change in M1: that's when it was reduced to a monitoringrange and was raised to 4 to 8 percent as compared to the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent tentative range. In other [years] the changes were in M2or other broad aggregates.MR. MARTIN. Good report.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We changed M1 only once?MR. AXILROD. As far as I can tell, I think that's right.MR. RICE. The change [unintelligible] circumstances.MR. BOEHNE. Even central bankers change their minds!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would be with those whoendorse alternative II. It seems to me that the reasons are verycompelling to utilize that alternative, and I'm not sure I'm impressedby any compelling reasons to make a change at this point. Theeconomic outlook as we discussed it around the table seems prettysolid. The inflation outlook is not unreasonable, although itcertainly continues to be an area that we need to focus on. And thevelocity patterns seem to be more predictable than has been the case.So, I would be in favor of alternative II. I certainly would thinkthat raising the M3 and credit aggregate ranges would be appropriate.And I think we should begin to place much greater emphasis on M1 andthat that should be clear in the message that you will be giving. Iwould think that the longer-run objective for the year ought to betoward the middle part and I would prefer that we not necessarilyspecify that we would be in the upper or lower part of the range. Iwould be bilateral on that, depending on how the velocity outlookdevelops during the year. Our objective should be toward the middle;by so doing, we continue to give emphasis and credibility to theobjective of returning to reasonable price stability.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I continue to think we ought to have ourmonetary targets and try to make the economy, and mostly inflation,conform to them. I think we are in some danger of adapting thetargets to what we think is ahead in the economy. The only reason fordoing the latter, it seems to me, is a concern about high interestrate problems for farmers, developing countries, or the dollar. Thoseare important. But somehow it seems to me that if we now raise our-40-2/12-13/85targets, we're in effect saying that we're going to maximize as bestwe can the expansion of the economy and maintain interest rates as lowas is consistent with continued rapid growth rather than focus on theobjective of inflation. I think inflation is the least achieved ofall of our objectives even though it has been better than we expected.But the same is true of unemployment and growth; we have done betteron each front than we expected. But in absolute terms we are fartherfrom a good condition on inflation than we are, say, on unemploymentand the use of the economy's potential. So, I would stay withalternative II, and where there seems to be a misfit such as on M3 andtotal credit, I would nevertheless stay with these ranges. I thinkthey are telling us something; they are not just something that needsto be made to fit what the economy does. If they don't fit, they'retelling us that credit is expanding at a rapid rate which at some timein the future will cause us trouble. And we should recognize that.Neither, therefore, would I aim at the upper [end of the] range. Iwould say that 7 percent plus 1 or 2 percent velocity gives us plentyof room. I would, therefore, accept alternative II exactly as it is.Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I also would choose alternative II for a coupleof reasons. One, if we raise the range even to 7-1/2 percent--which Irecognize is a move down from the 4 to 8 percent--or if we move to an8 percent limit on the high side, as has been suggested, I believewe're really saying that we've done our job on inflation and we'rewilling to accept inflation at roughly a 4 percent level or perhaps alittle above. And that's a view that I would not want the Committeeto give to the public; I would not want to permit that kind ofinterpretation. Secondly, as to the ranges themselves, it seemsfairly clear from the discussion yesterday and from the projectionsthat 4 to 7 percent will accommodate the growth in nominal GNP thatwe're looking for with the level of inflation we're expecting. And ifit doesn't, as we have done in the past, we can talk about the upperpart of the range. I would emphasize looking for growth near themidpoint, but I'd be willing to go to the upper part of the rangeproviding velocity doesn't perform as we are projecting. As a result,it seems to me that these ranges accommodate what we're looking for.I would like to have the top at 7 percent, therefore providing somerestraint in the event that the projections don't come through.Lastly, I'm not very concerned about M3 or credit; so the ranges,whatever they may be, are perfectly all right with me. For M1 and M2I would prefer those in alternative II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, as we all know, these rangesserve many masters. One of the masters is the general impression ofthe public as to our long-run game plan--which has been expressed sowell by you over the years--to reduce gradually over time the rate ofmonetary growth and get it down to noninflationary levels. For thatreason I think it is important, if only symbolic, to lower the upperend of that range a touch. Going down to 4 to 7 percent, however,brings up the problems that I talked about yesterday and thatGovernors Martin and Partee ran off very well today, so I won't repeatwhat those problems are. As I mentioned yesterday, our staff forecastshows money running considerably over the upper end of the 4 to 7-41-2/12-13/85percent range for a good part of the first half of this year based onthe present level of interest rates. To keep that from happening, ourstaff thinks we would have to get a very considerable increase ininterest rates. That is on the assumption that the velocity of moneyis going to be declining during the first half of the year. Puttingall that together, I would come out in favor of a 4 to 7-1/2 percentrange. Although a case could certainly be made for 4 to 8 percent, Iwould prefer the 4 to 7-1/2 percent simply because of the publicperception that we are gradually making some progress in reducing theupper end of that M1 range. And it is my understanding that thefinancial community certainly pays a lot more attention to M1 thanthey do any of the other Ms. I share President Guffey's views on M3and total credit: it probably doesn't make much difference. But Iwould adopt the M2, M3, and total credit ranges of alternative I,simply to get back to reality a little. That would be the totalpicture I would recommend, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Garbarini.MR. GARBARINI. Mr. Chairman, the heart of the Midwestcontinues to dance to a rhythm that I believe the Chairman has playedover the years, which leads us down a road called "reduced inflation."We would support alternative II and hope that we would not signal thatwe will be in the higher end of the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Miss Seger.MS. SEGER. I support alternative I. I'll just say "ditto"to Governor Partee's comments plus add another observation about M1.And that is: In 1984, using the revised numbers, M1 growth was 5.2percent, which was 0.8 below the midpoint of last year's goal, if Idid the arithmetic correctly. I know we decided not rebase. Still,if the targets for last year were appropriate and if that's the wayM1's actual performance came in, then I don't think we should ignorethat when we set the targets for this year. Therefore, I would liketo add that to all the other reasons for having the M1 range at 4 to 8percent. Also, as I listen to comments--and I also went back and re-read materials for the last two years--I'm not convinced that wereally have identified in any exact way the relationship between moneygrowth and the economy. I don't think we always know what's going tohappen to velocity; we may think we do, or would like to, but I don'tthink it works out that way. So, maybe it's more honest to send asignal that we don't have these precise measures and, therefore, wewill go with broader bands.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would join those who arearguing for alternative II, and I would be willing to take it the wayit's specified in the Bluebook. I really have no additionaljustification for that other than I think it allows for adequate moneygrowth. I do think that the perception is always important and it iscertainly important right now. I think that would convey theperception that I'd like to see us convey.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.-42-2/12-13/85MR. GRAMLEY. I tend to think of these longer-run ranges theway Karen Horn does. They tend to send a message about what ourstrategy for monetary policy is over a longer period. And I reallythink there's a complacency developing in our country about thisinflation problem. I just don't think we can afford to decide, evenimplicitly if not explicitly, that we don't need to be concerned aboutthis inflation problem anymore. I'm a bit puzzled when people say 7percent growth in M1 is a constraining influence on the economy. Ifour forecast for prices is half-way honest, we're talking about a 4percent increase or less, and a 7 percent increase in nominal M1provides for a 3 percent increase in real money balances. If you lookover the trend of the past 20 to 25 years, you'll find that the growthrate of real M1 has a trend of less than 1 percent a year. So, Iwould like to stay with these targets. If the economy turns outnowhere near the lines of the staff forecast and it's much weaker, Iwould be prepared later on to see growth of M1 exceed that upperlimit; but I don't want to send that kind of message now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, I agree with Governor Gramley. From thestandpoint of the effect on expectations, I think it is wise normallynot to change the guidelines unless there is a compelling reason, andI don't see a compelling reason to change the guidelines. If we gettrend velocity we can finance an 8 percent nominal GNP rise verycomfortably within the alternative II guidelines. I don't knowwhether we're going to get trend velocity or not. If we don't--if weget an aberrant velocity behavior--we may have to change theguidelines within the year. But I don't think we ought to assumeanything other than trend velocity at this point in time. And I thinkalternative II would meet our economic objectives very easily giventhat assumption.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gainor.MR. GAINOR. We would line up with those who favoralternative II. Our forecast shows very favorable growth, even withthat range, and we think it's appropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a tremendous unanimity amongnonmembers.MR. BLACK. That augurs well for next year!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we get into this problem partlybecause I suspect the inflation forecast is too high--not to beat adead horse anymore. There's room for real growth under any of thealternatives in here [if we had] more modest inflation assumptions.The choice boils down to this. I'm not going to make everybody happy;we have four targets here and 12 members and the permutations andcombinations of that grouping are enormous. The only proposal I canmake is to stick with something like alternative II; I don't know howmany people that would make directly happy. Most people have beenfocusing on M1, so we can talk about modifying some of those otherranges if that's important. But I would also say that we ought togive the message--we do that in the short-term targets, I suppose--that we don't mind being above that cone for the time being. I wouldbe inclined, in the interest of reconciliation if nothing else, and it-43-2/12-13/85may be meaningful, to put a sentence in the directive indicating thatwe wouldn't necessarily be unhappy if growth were in the upper part ofthe range. I don't like the sentence that's there now; and I don'tknow why we should single out M1 given all the comments either. I'dhave a sentence to the effect that: "The Committee agreed that growthin the monetary aggregates more generally in the upper parts of theirranges for 1985 may be appropriate, depending upon" something. Oneapproach would be to use "provided inflationary tendencies remainsubdued." But I might say something about business too. I don't knowquite what we should say. I don't think we want to say "would beappropriate provided business is weak." That sounds a little odd.It's the fact of the matter, but it might suggest we're anticipatingsomething in that connection.Let me just try this. We have a majority that wantssomething like alternative II; it's not a very large majority but someof those said they didn't want to put in anything about being in theupper part of the range. The obvious accommodation is something likealternative II but some acknowledgment that growth in the upper partof the range might be possible. I wouldn't put it as an aim; I'd sayit might be appropriate under certain conditions. An alternative, ashas been expressed, is to go to something like 4 to 7-1/2 percent andnot say anything about being in the upper part. Let me try broadlythose two alternatives. We'll return to fine tuning M3 and creditlater. Looking at M1: Who would have a preference for leaving it at 4to 7 percent but with some acknowledgment--the precise language to bedetermined--first of all, that running above the range now isn'thorribly prejudging the short-term decision; and secondly, that wewouldn't be amazed and may well find it desirable to be in the upperpart of the range, depending on how things develop? To have aspecific acknowledgement of that is one alternative. The otheralternative would be just to go to 4 to 7-1/2 percent and leave it atthat.MR. GUFFEY. With respect to the first alternative, are youcontemplating putting it in writing or doing it in your testimony?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right now I'm contemplating putting itinto writing.MR. GUFFEY. Well, you're going to testify within--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It could be done in the testimony, butwhat I'm proposing at the moment is that some sense of that be writteninto the directive.MR. GUFFEY. I'd prefer not to go that way. I'd rather go tothe 7-1/2 percent, if those are the only alternatives you aresuggesting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I want to concentrate on themembers at the moment. Who would prefer what?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I have a strong preference for thefirst.MR. PARTEE. I have a strong preference for the second.-44-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's raise hands. How many have apreference for the first? Five. How many have a preference for thesecond? Five.MR. WALLICH. I don't need to have a preference for either,do I?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Two things were presented to you. I don'tknow what you like and [unintelligible]. If you have anotherpreference that commands more support, that's--MR. WALLICH. Without committing, if I had to choose betweenthe two, then I would take the first.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me go to the fine tuning. Whatdo people feel about M2 or M3 and total credit? I don't know that wereally want to raise the range for total credit; it's already awfullyhigh. It may be exceeded. I don't know what kind of messages wewould be sending by raising the total credit figures at this point.MR. PARTEE. I think it's a recognition of the unexpectedsize of the inflow of capital from abroad.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Are people talking about 9 to 12percent?MR. PARTEE. Pardon?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Were you suggesting raising that?MR. PARTEE. To 9 to 12 percent.MR. RICE. I thought you were talking about 9-1/2 to 12-1/2percent, as in alternative I.MR. PARTEE. I said that seemed a little steep. But I wasnot speaking of the numbers; I was speaking of the reason why we wouldrecognize that they were high numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure of that reason, but he has meconfused on it. Does anybody want to raise that from 9 to 12 percent?MR. RICE. Does anyone want to raise it?MR. PARTEE. Above 9 to 12 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Above 9 to 12 percent. All right, that's9 to 12 percent. On M3 you expressed that opinion. Do other peoplewant to raise the M3 range?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I wouldn't be bothered by 1/2 point[higher] on that just because I'm not sure what's going to happen toit.MR. GRAMLEY. Everybody knows we studiously ignore M3 anyway,so whether we have 6 to 9 percent or 6 to 33 percent or whatever--MR. RICE. Since it doesn't matter, why not raise it?-45-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then, nobody is bothered by raising it to9-1/2 percent?SEVERAL. No.MS. SEGER. Did you say 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent or 6 to9-1/2 percent.MS. SEGER. That's what I want; I want the 9-1/2 percent highend.MR. BOEHNE. Why don't we make it 6 percent to whatever?MR. MARTIN. 6 percent or more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2?MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we're going to have trouble withthat at 6 to 8-1/2 percent. I would prefer 6 to 9 percent.MR. MARTIN. I would too.MR. BALLES. I would too.MS. SEGER. I would too.MR. WALLICH. I definitely would not. I simply don'tunderstand why we have to raise all the ranges, or almost all of them,when we've had lower inflation than expected. It seems to me adevastating signal.MR. PARTEE. It provides for a little more room for realgrowth.MR. WALLICH. Sure.MR. PARTEE. I don't see anything wrong with that myself.MR. WALLICH. You want to maximize growth and take theinflation that that eventually would provide?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The problem is that if you allow forreal growth of more than 4 percent, I think you have to forget aboutthe targets in one sense and ask yourself the question: What's likelyto be going on in the economy over some period of time? I'm nottalking about a quarter, but if over a period of time the economy isgrowing by more than 4 percent, it seems to me that in thecircumstances we're faced with right now--leaving aside the magic ofthese targets--the outcome may well be one that is going to put morepressure on financial markets and interest rates. And it's going tosubvert our effort to try and create a policy environment in which wecan keep the economy growing at 4 percent for a long time. That's oneof the things that worries me, Chuck.MR. PARTEE. Well, to me 4 percent is desirable and 4-1/2percent is acceptable. We're starting off with an unemployment rate-46-2/12-13/85of 7.4 percent. There was talk about that being the full employmentlevel; I certainly don't agree with that. I think we have room to godown; I don't think we know; we have to probe and see. I think weprobably could have 4-1/2 percent growth for this year withoutdifficulty.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Again, that's another possibility.The problem I have is that the higher we set the targets the moredifficult it will be to react in some coherent way if things break onthe up side.MR. PARTEE. But if they break on the up side, we're going togo right through the upper ends of these ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we had 5.6 percent real growth lastyear and inflation at 3.5 percent with 5.2 percent M1 growth.MR. PARTEE. A very unusual year. I don't think it will berepeated.MR. BALLES. That's because velocity went up 4 percent, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know it did. That's why--MR. BALLES. If you believe it's only going up 1 percent thisyear, then you have to allow for more growth of money. I think it's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who said it's going to go up 1 percentthis year?MR. BALLES. I said if you think it might. That's what I'massuming ranges are for: to allow for realistic possibilities. We'renot committed to go to the upper end by setting it 1/2 percentagepoint higher, but it allows us to in case that develops, as our staffand the Board staff seem to think is likely. If it doesn't, so muchthe better. We're not committed to going to 7 or 7-1/2 percent.Governor Wallich raised the question: Why are we increasing ourranges? My answer to that, Henry, would be that it appears to us thatthe demand for money is increasing and one should allow for that inthe determination of the ranges. If we don't, I think we'll get thekind of results we did in the first half of 1982 when we tightened upat a time that, in my opinion, we should not have and we drove theeconomy into a deeper recession than might otherwise have been thecase. And it was because, in my case at least, of a belatedrecognition that the velocity of money was declining. I don't want tomake that mistake again.MR. WALLICH. It wasn't declining last year; and 7 percent M1growth was associated during the '70s with rapidly acceleratinginflation.MR. BLACK. Well, the faster the rate of growth in money thelower the velocity is going to be, necessarily; it's just anarithmetic truth. If we hit the top part of the target we're going tohave lower velocity. If we hit the midpoint, we're going to havehigher velocity. I think either way we can finance it. But if we hitthe top part, then somewhere along the way velocity is going to return-47-2/12-13/85to a somewhat normal pace, I would assume. And that's where thetrouble comes in.MR. MORRIS. I think we ought to have a lot of humilityaround this table in forecasting velocity. It seems to me that all wecan do is assume that we're going to get trend velocity; anything elseis pure speculation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble is we don't even know what thetrend is.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I would think the more the humility youhave the wider the range you would want.MR. GRAMLEY. Why should we be more humble now than we wereat midyear?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm going to defer this vote untilwe do the short run. Maybe that will put some light on what we shoulddo. Will you introduce the short run, Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, I will be referring, ofcourse, to the table on page 10 [of the Bluebook]. Most of thesealternatives, depending on what you perceive the Committee is willingto do for the rest of the year, would be consistent in the long runwith the range of alternatives that the Committee is now discussing.In a sense, I suppose alternative B would be viewed as most consistentsince that alternative assumes, if we're right about our estimates ofM1 relationships to reserve conditions, very little change inunderlying short-term interest rates and reserve conditions, typifiedby a level of borrowing in the neighborhood of $300 million over thenext several weeks. We expect that that would be doable with an 8percent growth in M1. I might add, although I don't know if thechicken's entrails are [of interest] to the Committee, that ourmonthly model would suggest somewhat higher growth of M1 over thebalance of this period--perhaps a couple of points higher. On theother hand, the quarterly model, left to its own devices, wouldsuggest that growth over the quarter would be a lot less than we'reestimating here. The growth implied here would give you a negativevelocity--on the order of [minus] 1-1/4 percent--assuming GNP is aboutas we have projected now for the first quarter. That would be, in asense, a partial offset to the positive velocity on the order of 3percent in the fourth quarter and would be, on average, obviouslyclose to 1 percent. We expect also a substantial slowdown in M2 andM3 growth in February and March largely for the reason given earlier:that the drop in offering rates on MMDAs and money market funds iscatching up with the drop in market rates. Indeed, market rates haverisen about 25 basis points recently so they are accelerating thatcatch-up. So, we would expect M2 and M3 growth to slow substantially.All this is assuming funds are trading around 8-1/4 percent and notthe average of about 8-1/2 percent of the last two weeks. But thoserelationships, as the Committee knows, are rather loose and dependvery much on how the market perceives money supply and businessconditions and how that might feed back and be affecting Fed policyover the very short run. Mr. Chairman, that very briefly sums up theessential points contained in [the Bluebook].-48-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Apart from the numerology here, I think asusual the decision at the moment is: Do we want to tighten up, easeup, or leave policy unchanged in the immediate future?MR. WALLICH. In terms of the level of borrowing, this issurely a policy that can hardly be eased any further. The borrowingfigure is very low. In terms of the funds rate to which thisborrowing relates, I think it's true that that's still a rather highnumber relative to the rate of inflation. I see no reason to want toraise the funds rate at this time, but neither would I want it to godown; nor would I want to do something with the discount rate. So,I'd come out with "B."MR. PARTEE. I would agree with "B" also; I would agree withwhat Henry said--that the current situation is adequate. It looks asif we're getting a pretty good recovery, somewhat shaded by thatretail sales report this morning. But the rate of growth still seemsadequate. I would point out that we've been bordering on the highside of monetary growth and, when I say "remain unchanged," I have inmind a moving down in the rates of monetary growth of the sort thatthe staff is projecting for the quarter. If that didn't occur, Ithink it would give us trouble.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I ditto what Chuck just said.MR. RICE. So do I.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So do I.MR. MARTIN. I go along with "B," Mr. Chairman. My onlyreservation with regard to "B" is what the band of confidence isaround the 8 percent December-to-March number for M1. It seems to methat the odds are that M1 will exceed 8 percent. My only discomfortis that 8-1/4 percent may not be the correct fed funds rate for theshort run; maybe it should be 8-1/2 percent. But I take it that thereis enough flexibility built into our procedures [to allow for] an8-1/2 percent rate if we need it to get 8 percent [M1 growth] orwhatever that is--less than the 10 percent and 12 percent that we'vebeen experiencing in recent months. Given that assumption, I would goalong with "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I would go with "B" also.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think it is desirable for us totry to end the year at the midpoint of alternative II, so I tend tofavor the short-run M1 path of "C." By the same token, I have someleanings toward "B" too, because I don't believe it would be desirablenecessarily to move to the kind of borrowing target that "C"contemplates in the Bluebook. Edging on up toward the $400 millionborrowing level would be as much as I'd want to do. Perhaps moreimportant than that, I'd want those words on lines 93 and 99--where wehave the choice between "would" and "might"--to be "would" in both-49-2/12-13/85cases. I don't think we know which way it's going to be and I'd liketo see us be prepared to move in either direction, if the aggregatesare not staying on the target. I think the phrase at the beginningshould be "increase slightly;" that would be preferable to what isshown in "C." And I would go with the funds rate range of "B" becauseI'm not thinking about very much action at this point and that oughtto be fully adequate to encompass anything I have in mind.MR. PARTEE. "Increase slightly" for pressure on reservepositions?MR. BLACK. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, the same factors thatinfluenced me on my views on the long-term ranges are coming intoplay, particularly in the short term here. My view, and I hope it iscorrect, is that we're experiencing an increase in the demand formoney as a direct reflection and delayed reaction to the drop ininterest rates in the latter part of last year. To slow money downfrom the rapid growth rates of December and January would require aconsiderable increase in interest rates, which I don't want to see,particularly in view of the precarious situation of agriculturalloans, international loans--the whole shooting match. Therefore, forthis period and this period alone, I would come out in favor ofalternative A for the short-term specifications.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, of the three alternatives thatyou presented--tightening, loosening, or staying the same--I think theproper course for policy at the moment is steady as we go. We haveanother meeting of this Committee within a relatively short time, atthe end of March. I think there is enough time to allow the situationto unfold and to wait and see what happens. If I have a bias, itwould be for eliminating the tilt toward accommodation. And if we got[money growth] at the upper end of the range, I would hope that wewould be prepared to move more promptly against that rather than theother way. But I think it is important that we stay steady for thetime being, and I guess that's associated with alternative B and itsspecifications.MR. GRAMLEY. Like Chuck, I'm worried about how fast money isgrowing now and I hope we're going to get that slowed down. I'm notat all certain that I know what level of the Federal funds rate isgoing to do that. I'm reluctant to see policy shift from onedirection to another abruptly, and I can go along with "B" with theunderstanding that if, in fact, we get money growth above thosenumbers, we begin to snug up a bit.I would like to call the Committee's attention to thelanguage of the operational paragraph with respect to what it saysabout economic activity. I think we need a change there. What wehave there talks about an easier policy in the context of sluggishgrowth in economic activity and greater restraint if indications ofsignificant strengthening of economic activity occurred. If we leavethat wording, it seems to be saying that we still think the economy is-50-2/12-13/85sluggish and I don't think that's what we ought to say; we ought tohave a more neutral set of phrases than that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else have anything to say?MS. HORN. I favor alternative B. I do share concerns withsome of the people around the table that we have had 3 months ofstrong M1 growth and that by the end of March it could be more like 5months. And at that point my concerns would be greater about thedirection of M1 growth. But for the time being I favor "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Garbarini.MR. GARBARINI. I would also favor "B," and I would prettymuch echo Bob Black's comments: I also have a little more concernabout the accommodation and, therefore, lean a little more toward "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Miss Seger.MS. SEGER. I can handle no change from the present [stance],if that's what alternative B is. I would be concerned, though, if nochange brought about a substantial rise in the fed funds rate becauseof how that is interpreted in the markets as a signal of what we'redoing and also because of the very severe problem with the superdollar and some of the other special factors that I've mentionedbefore.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I'd also choose alternative B. The onlyquestion that I would have with respect to alternative B is the $300million borrowing level that the staff associates with an 8-1/4percent funds rate. I would just point out the pattern of seasonalborrowing between now and the next meeting. If you just take 1984,for example, seasonal borrowing went to a very low level of roughly$150 million by the end of the period. If we're at or near africtional level of borrowing now and we get $150 million of seasonalborrowing, then that suggests to me that the funds rate might welldrop below the [8-1/4] percent. We would have a hard time holding itthere without some additional--MR. PARTEE. What is seasonal borrowing now--$60 or $70million?MR. KOHN. The level of seasonal borrowing has been about $60million over the past 4 or 5 weeks.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, in January; and then historically it beginsto move up. For example, at the end of March in 1984 it was $150million after starting the year at or about the same level [as thisyear]. So there's an increase of about $100 million in seasonalborrowing alone, which may complicate Desk operations if [adjustment]borrowings are at or near a frictional level now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.-51-2/12-13/85MR. KEEHN. Well, I was in favor of alternative II before andalternative B here seems to fit that pattern appropriately. So, forthe reasons I've stated, I'd be in favor of alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else? Mr. Gainor.MR. GAINOR. We too would favor alternative B. If we weregoing to fine tune it, however, we would move to the direction of "C,"probably to 7-3/4 percent or something like that [for M1].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris, we're left without a commentfrom you.MR. MORRIS. Well, I would buy alternative B. I think Rogerhas made a very good point that the borrowing target ought to behigher than $300 million--more like $400 million.MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we need to develop fairly promptlya view as to the kind of weight we give to seasonal borrowing. It'snot zero and it's not a hundred; it's something in between. Ofcourse, we could have an unusual increase in seasonal borrowing--maybe not between now and the next meeting but between now and midyear--and we need to know how to evaluate that if it occurs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] we've really had adifferent program for seasonal borrowing, we'd have to take account ofit. It's going to develop in the next five weeks.MR. AXILROD. What we present, of course, always assumes anormal seasonal in a sense.MR. PARTEE. Yes. Well, this just reminds me that it'ssomething we ought to be looking at.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in this case, we seem to have agreat degree of unanimity about alternative B, whatever that means.Let me interpret alternative B. Borrowing is roughly around $300million. It has been running a little above $300 million, actually,so I would think alternative B is consistent with something like $300to $400 million, depending upon the tone and feel of the markets,including the exchange market. If the evidence accumulated in thenext few weeks that we're distinctly above it, the tendency would beto tighten a bit.MR. PARTEE. Above on the aggregates?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, above these numbers for theaggregates. But probably we would not move very aggressively at thispoint. It sounds fine in concept. If this happened coinciding withweak business news and a strong dollar, I would have some questionabout it. At least at this point I would interpret this as notabsolutely automatic if those two condition arose. But thepresumption would be in that direction. The prospects of easing, Ithink, are substantially less in the sense that we would have to haveslower growth in the aggregates than suggested in alternative B plusgreater concerns about the business picture than have been expressedaround this table. That's what I would interpret alternative B tomean. Does that differ widely from what anybody else thinks? I-52-2/12-13/85attempted to incorporate this into a somewhat rewritten directive butI don't have any copies of that.MR. AXILROD. Yes, we have that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You might take a look at it.MR. PARTEE. I think Lyle's point was good about thosemodifiers on the business situation.MR. GRAMLEY. I have a suggestion for a way of dealing withthat that's fairly neutral, and that is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I rewrote the whole thing. I gaggeda little at saying "maintain" the degree of reserve pressure when it'ssomething of a euphemism to say we have any reserve pressure at themoment.MR. MORRIS. It should read: "the absence of reserve[pressures]."MR. PARTEE. "The same reserve posture."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I made it "maintain reserveconditions." Presumably, this would be--what do we have there: 8percent and 10-1/2 percent and 9-3/4 percent? Those are awfullyprecise fractions. I doubt whether we generally put "3/4s" in there,do we?MR. AXILROD. Not really. We get hung up with maintainingdifferences among the alternatives consistent with what our modeltells us.MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] number of models you look at.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would be sorely tempted to say 10percent for both of them, just to round them off.MR. PARTEE. Wouldn't it require quite a substantial slowingof M2 growth to get 10 percent, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Well, it slows to 9 percent and then to 7-3/4percent to get 10-1/2 percent.MR. PARTEE. January was pretty high?MR. AXILROD. January was 14-1/2 percent.MR. PARTEE. 14-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Technically, we could separate out the M1,M2, and M3 and say something like: "Growth of M1 would be at an annualrate of around 8 percent, and growth of M2 and M3" etc.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The only word I stumble over a bitis "limited." Could that be made "gradual" or "moderate" or---53-2/12-13/85MR. PARTEE. I do too. Maybe "some." And then for theeasing sentence [rather than] "might be acceptable," I think we oughtto say "would be acceptable" under those conditions you havespecified.MR. WALLICH. Well, this is [unintelligible] the fact that Ithink of it in a deliberately asymmetrical manner. Wouldn't "might"and also the word "substantially"--MR. PARTEE. Yes, I thought "substantially"--MR. MARTIN. I think it should be symmetrical given theunknowns we're mulling over here.MR. BLACK. I favor symmetry but if we must be asymmetrical,I think this is the right direction.MR. WALLICH. That's right.MR. PARTEE. Well, I didn't mind the "substantially slowergrowth" but then might "be acceptable in the event of substantiallyslower growth in the monetary aggregates, sluggish growth in economicactivity, and continued strength of the dollar"? I thought "might"was perhaps a little reserved. Lyle, I think that does take care ofyour problem.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes. Where the term "sluggish growth" fallsnow, since it's second, it doesn't seem to say that we've failed tonotice what has happened so far.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could put in a sentence on theaggregates and say something like this: "Should growth in M1 appear tobe exceeding an annual rate of around 8 percent and M2 and M3 a rateof around 10 to 11 percent."MR. MARTIN. 12 percent down from 14--MR. PARTEE. 10 to 11 percent is okay. I think that isreasonably stated. We're going to get a slowing in M2 growth; there'sno doubt about that. But I think it will be hard to get it within thequarter when one month is 14-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how we should describe thisincrease in reserve pressures. I was looking for a word that said weweren't going to be terribly aggressive about it in the next fiveweeks. Given the conditions, a "modest increase"--MR. PARTEE. "Some increase" is pretty indefinite.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Some" isn't necessarily "modest." Whatword do we typically use? It's probably "some," isn't it?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it is "some."MR. BALLES. How about "some limited"?-54-2/12-13/85MR. BOEHNE. I think "limited" captures the spirit of whatwe've been talking about. If we did anything terribly aggressive, Iwould think that we'd want a consultation.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Maybe it's a matter of semantics.["Limited" sounds as] if there is a predetermined point beyond whichwe would not go in any circumstance. It's partly the semantics of itthat I'm reacting to. I am not talking about being aggressive oranything like that, but I think a word like "gradual" or "some" isjust more in [tune] with the kind of approach we take to these things.MR. MARTIN. I think the message is that we're giving this alittle tap; we're not letting the 10 to 12 percent run but we're notreversing course. Isn't that what we're trying to get at? That'swhat "some" says.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in a sense. But I think "some" isprobably what we use all the time when we've made big changes.MR. PARTEE. It says "pressures." We could change it to"conditions" as it has previously been.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can't say "increases in conditions."MR. PARTEE. Well, I was going to add--you may not care forthis--that we could say "some snugging up."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're right. I don't care for that.MR. GRAMLEY. It sounds a little obscene.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it has been pointed out to me thatthe typical version uses "somewhat greater or somewhat lesser."MR. GRAMLEY. Well, so long as we all understand what's goingto happen. This language is going to come out after the fact anyway.I think the point to be made is the one that Jerry made: that if wesay "limited," the public may say that we had a certain degreespecified and would go no further beyond that. We still want tomaintain the idea that we have the ability to respond to what ishappening.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's conveying that sense offluidity, even if we don't--MR. PARTEE. Actually, the suggestion "some limited" israther better with respect to that. "Some limited increase in reservepressures" doesn't have the precision.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could go with "modest" or "somemodest."MR. MARTIN. We would have to say "some modest."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's more than "modest."MR. GRAMLEY. What about saying "reserve pressures would beincreased somewhat, particularly if business activity"---55-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that sounds like more to me. Iunderstand it won't be published until later, but that's what wealways say.MR. MARTIN. I think the word "modest"--. Say "modestincreases would be sought."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if this is where we are, do we makethat sentence "Should growth in M1 appear to be exceeding an annualrate of around 8 percent and M2 and M3 a rate of around 10 to 11percent during the period from December to March, modest increases inreserve pressures will be sought, particularly" etc.? And then say"lesser restraint on reserve positions would be acceptable" and keepthe federal funds range at 6 to 10 percent. Is that where we are?This does imply, unless I'm wrong, that we will remain above thiscone.MR. AXILROD. Oh yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And in all cases, I guess.MR. AXILROD. If the cone is 4 to 7 percent, it comes out asa projection that by March the level is something like $3-1/2 billionabove it.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, would you consider adding somewords to the directive, such as you talked about a little earlier, toindicate that conditions might arise where we wish to be above thatlimit?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think this implies that we would beabove the upper limit. But I will return to that in the longer-termdecision. I think this implies--and we might as well say it--that weexpect to be above the upper limit of the cone in the early part ofthe year.MR. BALLES. That would take away a lot of the uncertaintyand speculation and guesswork in the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we should say it, if we havethis kind of short-term directive. I think I'd probably say it intestimony.MR. GRAMLEY. It's much better to say it in the testimonybecause that way the message gets to the public and you want it to.Otherwise, it's too late.MR. MARTIN. I think we should say it in both places.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I worry about this in the testimony:I don't know how to word it. We haven't exactly tightened but in theprocess of stopping the ease we're a little snugger than we were. Idon't know quite what word to use to convey the nuance. It's hardly asnug.MR. BLACK. If you want to get a chuckle, say it just thatway.-56-2/12-13/85MR. MARTIN. I thought the term of art this season was"tilt." We have removed the tilt.MR. KEEHN. If we're contemplating a shift to parallel lines,do you have to spend a lot of time talking about where we are inrelationship to the cone?MR. PARTEE. I think we have to leave the cone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's implied. I take it we're readyto vote on this. Then we'll have coffee.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say just for the record, and I'msure it's apparent to all of you, that the exchange market has moreprominence in this directive than it has ever had. It has beenmentioned in recent [announcements of] discount rate changes, but--.Let's have coffee.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somehow I didn't get a great message fromouter space as to how to resolve this long-range target while eatingdoughnuts. I continue to believe that what comes the closest tocapturing the central tendency is leaving the 4 to 7 percent. Wecould raise M2 and M3--at least the upper ends--by a 1/2 point, ifthat makes people feel happier. We would make some note that growthis going to be running above the cone. I don't think we have to saythat in the directive; I could say in the testimony that we're runningahead of the cone in the early part of the year and we expect that. Ithink that's normal and reasonable under all conditions. And we wouldhave some reference, probably, in the directive that it might beacceptable to be in the upper part of the range, but make it short ofsaying we're aiming for that. I don't think we have to say what we'reaiming for, conclusively, 9 months from now. We review it again atmidyear. If we really find that velocity is not right, then we mayhave to change the target in the middle of the year; we've had someexperience in doing that. But, meanwhile, we give a reasonablesignal. And it all comes against the background that I would like togive a little more confident view as to the inflation outlook, which Iwill for myself [in my testimony]. Therefore, it makes all thesenumbers fit better.So, I will try again: something like 4 to 7 percent, with amodifier in the directive, which we don't have precise language for-57-2/12-13/85yet; I'm fairly indifferent on M2 and M3 but if it really makes peoplefeel better to add another 1/2 point, I don't think that does us anygrave damage one way or the other; total credit looks awfully high tome, but I guess we could leave it where it is. Let's see whether wecan proceed on that basis. Let me ask a preliminary question. Anumber of people said they would rather have 4 to 7-1/2 percent or 4to 8 percent but they may or may not have wanted another 1/2 point onM2 and M3. Does it make any of those people happier to have another1/2 on M2 and M3?MR. MARTIN. I'd much prefer it on M1, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not what I asked.MR. BLACK. We could have it on M1 and drop it from M2 andM3.MR. MARTIN. I could go along with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the trouble with that isthat it's probably contrary to where the probabilities lie. Theprobabilities are that M2 and M3 are more likely to exceed [the upperends of the ranges] than M1.MR. PARTEE. But I would like to point out to you, Paul, thatthe staff's M1 projection under alternative B is for growth for thefirst quarter over the fourth quarter of 9.2 percent. If that's atall right, the 7 percent is a considerable constraint for theremainder of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what it means for themiddle of the year mathematically.MR. PARTEE. Well, for three more quarters it means about 6percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question it means less than 7percent.MR. AXILROD. About 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. About 6 percent?MR. AXILROD. About 6 percent or [just] below that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure, it takes all three--MR. PARTEE. Yes, right.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, one thing that might help--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is more, I would point out, than wehad all of last year when the GNP was rising by 5-1/2 percent.MR. PARTEE. It could happen.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, one thing that might help allthose who are worried about the 7 percent ceiling would be what you-58-2/12-13/85propose on the matter of the so-called parallel lines or the bands.My concern, specifically--because we have a money market model whichgives results very similar to those of the Board staff's monthlymodel--is that the model shows money growth for some months ahead atdouble-digit rates. To keep from getting that, we estimate we have toput short-term rates up at least 200 basis points or thereabouts. Butif we were to adopt the bands, that would take care of the problemearly in the year--in the sense that we would be above the cone butnot above that parallel line.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I certainly think we should be above thecone in these early months. Now, just how do we draw it? We can drawparallel lines; we can draw solid-line parallel lines and dotted-linecones; we can draw dotted-line or solid cones and dotted-line bands.MR. GRAMLEY. We could even use colors!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can draw the kind of thing that I drew,which is the way I tend to think of it. It doesn't make muchdifference in where the line actually falls. I'm open to any of thosevariants. I'd draw the parallel lines without the cone, if that's--MR. WALLICH. I think the discussion shows the danger of theband. The band allows you to go at any rate of speed during the earlymonths.MR. PARTEE. And they have to slow down later.MR. WALLICH. While I would ordinarily say it doesn't matterbecause you know what you're doing, here we're talking about it asthough it really made a difference. We give ourselves more leeway; weuse it right away.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For a good reason, though, I would say.In this particular case, we ended up with a slowdown in M1 growth lastyear, so it's quite natural--it's a characteristic of the band--thatwe would also be happy with an extremely low growth in the firstquarter, if you took it literally. We're not going to get that, butwith just the band itself M1 growth would still be within the band ifwe had zero growth, I suppose--or close to it--for this quarter.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The reverse is also true, though.If, as John says, we had double-digit M1 growth for several moremonths running, you can draw your lines any way you want and you haveone heck of a problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. None of this changes the fact that whatwe're fixing is where we'd like to be at the end of the year. Indeed,I don't think it makes an enormous difference whether it is 1/2percentage point higher at the top; it's visual. We're talking about$2-1/2 billion of money supply, right?MR. MARTIN. The band is a better way to communicate. Itessentially expresses what we do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with a band. I assumethat at the least we would draw a band along with the cone.-59-2/12-13/85MR. MARTIN. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Since there has been discussion about it,just for the purpose of elucidating how the two things look, at aminimum we would draw them both.MR. BALLES. And that would help.MR. GUFFEY. Well, we had the same problem at this time lastyear: January had growth in the double-digit range and we were abovethe cone until the end of the first quarter as I recall. I don't knowhow you explained it then but it didn't seem to create great problems.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does anybody have some strikingsuggestion as to how to draw the picture that they urgently want tobring to our attention? Left to my own devices, I will draw some kindof a band--a lopsided band or something--along with the cone.MR. GRAMLEY. It will become known as the Volckergram.MR. BLACK. With a truncated band.MR. WALLICH. If you connect the extreme points of lastyear's cone and this year's cone and make that the band, you'll findthat you have a very low rate of growth in that connecting line. Youwould be going from something that rose 8 percent to the next cone,which would be rising 7 percent. And the connecting line, if that'sthe top of the band, will be a lot flatter than the upper side ofeither cone.MR. PARTEE. A little flatter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It will be a little flatter than aparallel line, but hardly enough to be discernable.MR. WALLICH. Right.MR. PARTEE. Probably 1 percent flatter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be 1 percent flatter; well, itwould be 3/4 of a percent flatter. And since we're not up there atthe beginning anyway, it wouldn't make much difference. The simplestthing to do is probably a compromise between them. I might draw atruncated line--draw the cone with just a top parallel line.MR. BALLES. I'd settle for that.MR. BLACK. Where are you thinking about beginning the line?You explained that yesterday and I thought I understood but I wasn'tquite certain.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not saying that now. We wouldjust make it 3/4 of a percent different. If you draw parallel lines,they would both rise at a 5-1/2 percent rate of speed.MR. BLACK. Right.-60-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The bottom part of that would be out ofsight; nobody wants to go there initially. The only modification Ihad was that instead of a parallel line, I'd draw it back to thefourth quarter.MR. PARTEE. Target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [The fourth-quarter] target, which wouldbe 3/4 of a point higher because we ended up below the midpoint.MR. BLACK. Yes, that's what I understood you to say.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that's all. The only rationale isthat I find it easy to explain. I say that that was last year'starget and we presumed we would have been satisfied to be there.Assuming we were satisfied to be there, we want to have somecontinuity to the next year. We know where we want to be at the endof this year, we decided where we wanted to be at the end of lastyear, and that's just a line that happens to connect those two targetsthat we happened to agree upon. It's no big deal, and maybe it does--MR. PARTEE. It creates lots of room, all right.MR. WALLICH. It sure does.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're looking at these early monthssince--MR. PARTEE. Yes, and we're well within it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're not all that much within it,are we?MR. PARTEE. Well, if I understand the way you're going todraw it, we're a good deal more within it than with parallel lines.MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's more than with parallel lines.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be 3/4 of a percentage point morewithin it than--MR. PARTEE. Well, that is just connecting the points here.When I look at the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're unquestionably right in direction;I just don't know how far it will go. I'd have to look at it. Whereare these great pictures [in the Bluebook]?MR. PARTEE. M1 is right after the full page of tables.MR. MARTIN. Two pages beyond page 10.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the way I drew it before; that'sright. In the fourth quarter we're going to be 3/4 of a percentagepoint above the parallel line and it would get progressively less. Idon't know what it would be in the first quarter; I suppose 5/8ths ofa percentage point or so.-61-2/12-13/85MR. WALLICH. Well, it'll be more comfortable throughout theyear as far as how high up we can go. As far as the rate of growth wecan have, once we reach it, it'll be less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It won't be more comfortable in the fourthquarter.MR. WALLICH. There is more room to go up. There isn't moreroom once you're at the top.MR. GRAMLEY. You can always turn the picture sideways,though, Henry!MR. BLACK. Or upside down!MR. MARTIN. But only if you have a semi-log scale.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You come out the same place in the fourthquarter.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I think Governor Wallich issaying that if you reach the top of the parallel line you have to grow5-1/2 percent, no more than that; if you reach the top of the higherline you have to grow 4-1/4 percent or something. These are roughnumbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct. It's 4-3/4 percent--MR. PARTEE. Say we've had a couple of quarters of 9 percentgrowth; the arithmetic implication is that it is going to have to dropto 5 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think all these implications are thesame. Wherever you are in the first quarter, to meet the target atthe end of the year growth has to slow down.MR. MORRIS. Unless we rebase.MR. PARTEE. Now, there might lie the basis for somecompromise. We can go with the 4 to 7 percent on the understandingthat we're going to increase it later.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think clearly [unintelligible].MR. PARTEE. I don't recall that we ever have, but I may bewrong about that.MR. AXILROD. Yes, we did.MR. MORRIS. We did.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh yes.MR. PARTEE. We rebased, but did we ever raise it?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, we did both.MR. MORRIS. We eliminated it for one year.-62-2/12-13/85MR. GRAMLEY. In mid-1983 we--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We rebased and raised [the M1range].MR. GRAMLEY. We rebased and raised the target from 5 to 9percent.MR. BLACK. We rebased on the second quarter.MR. GRAMLEY. And accepted the overrun in the first half.MS. HORN. We rebased and we respecified.MR. GRAMLEY. We made a tremendous change in mid-1983.MR. BLACK. The base became the second quarter.MR. GUFFEY. And then we used it as a monitoring--MR. PARTEE. That's right, we did; rebasing made a bigdifference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we always reserve this right andwe have done it. Suppose it ended up that business is sluggish,inflation is doing fine, and the dollar is very strong, but liquiditypreferences are high and money growth is running high. We said moneygrowth is expected to run high in the first quarter of the year; if atthe middle of the year we say we don't think it's reasonable for it togo down, we have to raise the target. What I would hope would happenis that inflation will be less, we will get nice orderly growth, thatthis trend appears in M1--which it may or may not--and that everythingworks out just copacetic. Who knows? How much do you think theconsumer price index is going to be affected by this orange andvegetable situation?MR. KICHLINE. I think we have 4-3/4 to 5 percent for foodprices in the first quarter. Our CPI projection, let's see--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. While the staff is looking that up,I would just note that one of the things that could really help theprice outlook is some relaxation in these Japanese automobiles quotasbecause one of the troubling things about prices even now is the waythe auto manufacturers are sneaking in all these price increases.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just as a matter of curiosity, the samething occurred to me--MR. KICHLINE. We are expecting a CPI of 3-1/2 to 4 percentin the first quarter. Offsetting the food price rise is an expectedprice decline in energy of 4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much of a bulge do you have in thefood prices?MR. KICHLINE. How much of a rise in food? Food prices rose2-3/4 percent in the fourth quarter and we have them up to 4-3/4percent, so that's a 2 percentage point increase. Energy prices were-63-2/12-13/85about flat--up a percent--and we have them down 4 percent, so theyought to be offsetting factors in the first quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are Japanese cars in the consumer priceindex?MR. KICHLINE. Conceptually, yes. They expanded the modelssome years ago and I used to know that and I don't remember. But yes,conceptually.MR. GRAMLEY. I wouldn't look for much price relief fromraising the quotas. The quota increase probably will be quite small.And the excess demand for Japanese cars is so great that I think atexisting prices they could just ship a few more and that's about it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's probably true.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suspect that's right. But suppose theytake the quota off?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, my sense is that the Japanese would be soreluctant to risk the possibility of a reimposition of quotas thatthey would increase their shipments to the United States in quitemodest amounts. I would doubt seriously, if we had a removal of thequotas, that we would see an increase in Japanese shipments of morethan, say, 10 percent.MR. MARTIN. But don't forget that the South Koreans are nowcoming onto the market. [Unintelligible] and some of these othercompanies are coming on strong. And the [cars are priced] at $6,000and under.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, I know. I was just--MR. PARTEE. Favorable prices.MR. GRAMLEY. --making the comment solely with respect toJapanese quotas. The shipments from South Korea and so on are goingto increase anyway. But the shipments from Japan I don't think aregoing to increase very much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How big a car do they put in the consumerprice index?MR. KICHLINE. I have somebody on the staff who could giveyou the [specifics] in all sorts of ways, but I'm not the person.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not the man. But they don't pricethe expensive ones, do they?MR. PARTEE. Not the really [expensive ones].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what they call expensive.MR. PARTEE. Cadillacs.-64-2/12-13/85VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think we could guarantee that whatthey would call expensive would be different from what you'd callexpensive.MR. PARTEE. Actually, you'll find that any car is expensive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm afraid so.MR. PARTEE. $10,000 or more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't hear any bright ideas abouthow to draw these parallel lines. If I don't hear any stronger ideasright now, I will reserve that prerogative unto myself with theunderstanding that there's going to be some kind of parallel linepicture. But I will go back and ask two questions. Are those whowant higher ranges at all consoled by making M2 and M3 higher? Andare those who don't want higher numbers distressed by making M2 and M3higher?MR. MARTIN. It depends on whether we can agree with regardto language.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's look at the language. Stevehas given me a modified sentence. I don't know whether you'll likeit: "The Committee agreed that growth in"--MR. MARTIN. They ignore the separate--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It continues the first page. Change the"M1" to "monetary aggregates" and otherwise the first part remains thesame: "The Committee agreed that growth of the monetary aggregates inthe upper part of their ranges for 1985 may be appropriate, providedthat inflationary pressures remain subdued and depending on velocitytrends." If we use that kind of language, it just reads a little moresmoothly to me to say "may be appropriate depending on velocity trendsand provided that..."MR. MARTIN. It's important to make that comment with regardto velocity. That's been a good deal of the substance of ourdiscussion. And John Balles has been [suggesting] language withregard to the lagged effects of the interest rate drop in the lastyear. Whether that's appropriate--.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's broadly encompassedin this term "velocity trends." It may not be a trend, but in thiscontext we're not really talking about it depending on long-termvelocity trends; what we mean is depending upon velocity this year.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We're talking about short-termvelocity rather than long-term.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One could say "depending on velocitydevelopments."VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "Developments" is a better word.MR. PARTEE. And if we generalize it to say "monetaryaggregates" that may be appropriate.-65-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. GUFFEY. It picks up M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Depending on developments with respect tovelocity and provided that inflationary pressures remain subdued."How do you like that language?MR. GRAMLEY. Poetry.MR. BALLES. Sorry, Mr. Chairman, but are there some words inthat--we don't have it in front of us--that say something about beingabove the cone or whatever?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I wouldn't say that in thedirective. But it would be said; it's implicit in the decision wehave just made. We're talking about a fourth-quarter target here andit sounds a little awkward--I don't object to it, but it seems to metotally unnecessary--to say here that consistent with that fourth-quarter target we intend to be above the cone in the first quarter.MR. BALLES. Oh, I see now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that point should be made; I justdon't see that it's necessary here. I have no objections to saying ithere, but it just seems rather complicated to me.MR. PARTEE. You wouldn't be prepared to say monetaryaggregates in the upper part of their ranges or above? Well, thereare two great provisos.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but I think I could say somethingabout that in the testimony. I don't think we should set a range andsay we might be above it. We might. We haven't been within theranges all that consistently, but it's rather peculiar to say that inthe directive.MR. MARTIN. That's why 7-1/2--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with saying: "Obviously,we'll look at these at midyear; we expect to be above in the firsthalf of the year and if velocity were really slow we'd have to look atthis range again at midyear." I think we probably ought to say that.What about M2 and M3? Let me examine the proposition this way. I amassuming this language and--. Where are we on these three ranges? Ifound myself testifying the other day unable to remember what theranges were. At least psychologically that tells you something.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Page 5.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's the preference for [upper limitsof]: (a) 7, 8-1/2, and 9 percent, which is exactly the same asalternative II, as opposed to (b) 7, 9, and 9-1/2 percent?MR. PARTEE. Opposed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want the (b)?-66-2/12-13/85VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Or whatever it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't get around to asking thequestion!MR. MARTIN. Oh, I thought you said--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You got a little overanxious overthere!MR. MARTIN. No, we're just quicker!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm going to ask both. Option (a) isalternative II as shown [in the Bluebook]; (b) is 1/2 percentage pointhigher for M2 and M3. How many prefer (a)?MR. GRAMLEY. What are you talking about now?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Option (a) is alternative II.MR. PARTEE. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As is.MR. MARTIN. As is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All of this has the language in thedirective.MR. BALLES. There is only one hand up, Mr. Boykin's.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, (b) with a 1/2 percentage pointhigher on the upper end of M2 and M3.MR. RICE. Well, I'm not [for] M2.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I could live with your (b).CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the in-between course is raising M3.MR. PARTEE. I think M2 is likely to give us trouble and Iwould want that upper end up a little. I don't care what we do to M3because we don't pay any attention to it.MR. RICE. No; that's why it's harmless--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that's 100 percent true.MR. PARTEE. 99 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we use 7, 9, and 9-1/2 percent [asupper limits] and 9 to 12 percent [for credit], I guess. Does thathave the largest amount of support? It does raise a question in mymind: If we raise those M2 and M3 limits, maybe we should go back tojust talking about M1 in that sentence we just wrote.MR. MARTIN. We might still have a problem with M2.-67-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we could but it--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Why don't you see who could acceptyour (b) but not necessarily prefer it.MR. PARTEE. Yes, who can live with it?MR. AXILROD. Our point estimate of M2, which may be a littlelow, would only be a half point above the midpoint of that 6 to 9percent. It could well be 8-1/4 percent or higher.MR. GUFFEY. But it's still well within the range.MR. AXILROD. Yes. As I say, it's only a half point abovethe midpoint.MR. PARTEE. Well, your point estimate is already in theupper part of the range. That's another way of putting it.MR. AXILROD. Well, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your point estimate is what?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 8 percent.MR. AXILROD. 8 percent at the moment. That requires quite aslowdown in the subsequent quarters.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Keep in mind that that moment is11:50 a.m. By 12:00 noon it may be something else!MR. MARTIN. 10 percent!MR. PARTEE. We count [deposits at] nonbank banks in themonetary aggregates, don't we?MS. SEGER. Those that have checking.MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible.]MR. BLACK. Chuck, only those that take demand deposits.MR. PARTEE. What?MR. BLACK. Ones that aren't supposed to take deposits--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This actually makes M2 and M3 higher thanwe had them last year. What were [the ranges for] last year? I don'tguess there's any--MR. STERNLIGHT. Both were 6 to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6 to 9 percent for both of them? So wecan make M2 the same and M3 a little higher.MR. GRAMLEY. If we change it once more, I'm going to wear ahole in this paper!-68-2/12-13/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's try that (b): 7, 9, and 9-1/2percent; and 9 to 12 percent. How many go along with that? Well, Ithink that's as close as we're going to come. Let's vote on that.MS. SEGER. Just to educate me, if we go with the 4 to 7percent for M1, can you tell me why we can't tie it to the midpoint ofthe fourth quarter--that is, the range for last year that we shot for?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can, but we decided not to.MR. PARTEE. It's just that it produces so much rigidity tohave that as a precedent for doing it in the future. It's like havinga monetary rule.MS. SEGER. Making that up was one of the reasons why Iwanted to have a wider band. So, I can go with the narrower band ifit's calculated from a higher level.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is the reason in my mind forindicating that we might be happy in the upper part of the range,based upon what we know now. All right. Do you know what you'revoting on?SPEAKER(?). Not now.MR. GRAMLEY. I think so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7, 9, and 9-1/2 percent upper limits [forM1, M2, and M3, respectively], 9 to 12 percent [for credit], and thesentence as we talked about it in the directive. There's nothing elsein the language that raises a question is there?MR. BALLES. And with a Volckergram.MR. GRAMLEY. He's liable. We have already given him theauthority to make his pictures anyway he wants to including colors,dots--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the understanding that there will besomething like a parallel line on the [unintelligible].MR. BERNARD. Your reference is to all the aggregates and notjust M1 in this sentence?MR. PARTEE. I think it ought to say aggregates; it ought tobe generalized. If they don't happen to be there--well, they won't bethere.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles YesPresident Boehne NoPresident Boykin YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn Yes-69-2/12-13/85Governor Martin NoGovernor Partee Reluctantly, yesMR. PARTEE. Could you put in that "reluctantly"?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Somewhat reluctantly?MR. WALLICH. Limitedly.MR. BERNARD.Governor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich NoCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. I guess we have nothing elseto do. The Secretary points out to me that we had better modify thatsentence about retail sales registering a large increase in Novemberand remaining at a higher level in December since it's no longer true.The language he suggests is: "Total retail sales rose moderately inJanuary following a decline in December." With all that[unintelligible].MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a chance to go back and redo your[Humphrey-Hawkins] projections if you do that within a day or two. Iwon't register my concern about the price numbers, except that I'mreminding you that I registered it.MS. SEGER. Are we supposed to make a certain assumptionabout the value of the dollar to be consistent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think the assumption would bestated as: the value of the dollar will not be substantially changed.I think what we said last time was that its value would not be outsidethe range-of trading in recent months or something like that. Wecould have an 8 percent decline and not be outside that range.MR. GUFFEY. The assumption for the money growth is at themidpoint or--?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I really don't know. The assumption formoney at wherever you want to make it within that range, I guess.MR. GUFFEY. It makes quite a difference.MS. SEGER. The staff have [M1] at 6-1/2 percent in theirassumptions.MR. GUFFEY. Well, that's the point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can proceed to other things [andadjourn now].END OF MEETING-70-