Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 26, 1985A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington, D. C., on Monday, March 26, 1985 at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanBallesBlackForrestalGramleyKeehnMartinParteeRiceSegerWallichMessrs. Boykin, Guffey, Mrs. Horn, and Mr. Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne and Stern, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr.Mr.MrsMr.Mr.Mr.Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretarySteele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryBradfield, 1/ General CounselKichline, EconomistTruman, Economist (International)1/ Entered meetingMessrs. Bisignano, Broaddus, R. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey,Prell, Scheld, Siegman, and Ms. TshinkelAssociate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Accountafter action to ratify transactions in domestic operations.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMarch 26, 1985MR. MARTIN. With the indulgence of the Federal Open MarketCommittee, I would like to nominate Paul Adolph Volcker as theChairman of the Federal Open Market Committee.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Nominations closed!MR. GRAMLEY. Did he call him P. Adolph Volcker?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. None of that!MR. MARTIN. With the concurrence of the new Chairman, Iwould like to nominate Gerald Corrigan as the Vice Chairman of theFederal Open Market Committee.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any objections? I'm not hearingany. We will proceed to the selection of staff officers. Maybe theSecretary can read the roll of proposed staff officers.MR. BERNARD.For Staff Director and Secretary, Stephen AxilrodAssistant Secretary, Normand BernardDeputy Assistant Secretary, Nancy SteeleGeneral Counsel, Michael BradfieldDeputy General Counsel, James OltmanEconomist, James KichlineEconomist (International), Edwin Truman.Associate Economists from the Board:Donald L. Kohn;David E. Lindsey;Michael J. Prell; andCharles J. Siegman.Associate Economists from the Federal Reserve Banks:Joseph R. Bisignano, proposed by President Balles;J. Alfred Broaddus, proposed by President Black;Richard Davis, proposed by President Corrigan;Karl Scheld, proposed by President Keehn; andSheila Tschinkel, proposed by President Forrestal.SPEAKER(?). So moved.MR. MARTIN. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We need to select theFederal Reserve Bank for the execution of transactions for the SystemAccount. The New York Bank has performed this service for some years.Do we have a motion?MR. MARTIN. Move the New York Bank.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need a second.SPEAKER(?). Second.3/26/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We need to select theManagers for Domestic and for Foreign Operations of the System OpenMarket Account. Do I have a nomination for Mr. Sternlight and Mr.Cross?MR. MARTIN. So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. You presumably havereviewed the current Foreign Currency Authorization, the ForeignCurrency Directive, and the Procedural Instructions with respect toForeign Currency Operations. There are no changes [proposed] in anyof these. Are there any objections to continuing those? In theabsence of any objections we will proceed.In the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, wehave a proposal to change the intermeeting limit. Mr. Sternlight, doyou want to speak to that?MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, I don't think I have anythingsignificant to add to the short memorandum that I sent to theCommittee on that subject. As noted there, we had half a dozenoccasions last year when we asked for increases in the intermeetinglimit. It was never a problem to get [the Committee's approval of]those increases, but since we asked for increases in fully half of theintermeeting periods I think it was becoming almost a routine matterthat was going beyond the purpose served by that intermeeting limit.That purpose, it seems to me, is to flag really unusual changes. Ifthe limit were put up to a $6 billion level, I think it would stillserve that purpose of flagging unusual changes in that leeway. Imight mention that in the period that is coming up now we may verypossibly need an increase even beyond the $6 billion. But I wouldrather wait until we are further into the period and have a betteridea of just how much of a temporary increase we may want to request.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion?MR. KEEHN. Not on that point. But with regard to theholdings, I would like to raise a question with regard to Farm CreditBank holdings in the System Account. Given the circumstances, Iwonder whether it would be appropriate to add to those holdings duringthe current year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's dispose of this limit first. I takethe silence to mean acquiescence. We had better get a motion then.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.MR. MARTIN. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With no objection, it's approved. Maybewe can wait [on the issued raised by Mr. Keehn] until we get to theagenda item on domestic open market operations. We need to approvethe minutes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.-2-3/26/85MR. MARTIN. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All in all not much of a market.MR. PARTEE. No question; the quality of it isn't much.MR. RICE. Why did we buy sterling? Even though it was asmall amount, what were the reasons for that?MR. CROSS. Well, this was at a time when sterling was beingparticularly hard hit and our purchase was in part a cooperativegesture to the British, who were very much concerned that the poundwas taking more than its share of the brunt of this change. Itcoincided with the time of the high level visit of Mrs. Thatcher.MR. RICE. It was really just a gesture?MR. CROSS. Well, I think it had some implications of beingdone in light of those political circumstances, yes.MR. WALLICH. Sam, $10 billion is a large amount evenrelative to the U.S. current account deficit. Do you see this amountof dollars having been put into the market as having any lastingeffect on the exchange rate or is the whole move of the dollar due to[the savings and loan situation in] Ohio and similar factors?MR. CROSS. I would certainly think that the intervention hadits effect. We collectively--mainly other central banks--added reallyquite an enormous amount of dollars to the stocks sitting out there.If you consider that we're running about a $10 billion current accountdeficit every month, we added another month there; and somebody has toabsorb those dollars. Some of those were absorbed at levels that nowdon't look very good. So that has been overhanging the market and[the intervention] has called attention to the fact that theauthorities can come in with a pretty heavy hand and do theseoperations. This is undoubtedly part of the reason, but not the onlyreason, why the markets themselves are in such a sloppy condition.People are increasingly unwilling to be market makers out there. Ithink intervention certainly has had an effect. It has reminded themarket that the officials can come in rather forcefully and it hasleft a lot of dollars out there to be absorbed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure everybody interpretsintervention as having that large an effect.MR. PARTEE. It's the equivalent of a month's current accountdeficit. It seems to me the price effect was quite small for thatkind of quantity.MR. CROSS. Well, $10 billion is small relative to the totalof $120 billion. Still, it's money that somebody out there has--MR. PARTEE. I understand. They have to hold it.3/26/85VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think you have to look at theforeign exchange market right now in broader terms than just thedollars representing the current account deficit. The magnitude oftraffic in the churning and trading that are taking place in thatmarket--both in the cash market and all these derivative markets--isjust mind boggling at this point. I don't know how to measure it, butmy hunch is that if we measured this particular episode ofintervention against the size of the market in a trading sense--the$10 billion dollars spent over this period relative to what $10billion dollars would have been in, say, 1978--my hunch is that itwould be a pittance. Now, ultimately, the stocks should havesomething to do with the price response. But that market is just soenormous. Frankly, it's so enormous that to me it's very troublingjust by nature of the flows and the changing structure and character.Sam and I were talking a little about that at breakfast this morning.MR. PARTEE. In terms of total stocks of financial assets theaddition of $10 billion wouldn't be large; it would be very small.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions.MR. MARTIN. Move it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any comments on this generalsubject matter before we get to [the issued raised by] Mr. Keehn?MR. RICE. Peter, how do you explain the fact that the ESMdebacle had less effect on the market than Drysdale even though itwould seem that the ESM effects will have wider ramifications?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think what was so frightening in theDrysdale case, Governor, was that there were a number of dealers thatwere heavily involved. And until Chase Manhattan and ManufacturersHanover came through and agreed to meet those interest payments thatDrysdale was unable to make on that fateful day, there were a numberof dealers who were threatened with very serious losses and there wasa real question of the ability of these major market makers tofunction in the market. The market was on the edge of becoming ratherseized up and just unable to function well. This time there was akind of disgust, a view that another one of these small dealers hasmisbehaved and inflicted some losses in various places in the economy.But this was not seen as entering the central marketplace in the sameway as Drysdale.MR. PARTEE. It was just the public that lost.MR. RICE. Right. Only one dealer was involved.MR. GRAMLEY. They worry about their own.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There were a couple of dealersinvolved, but they were able--3/26/85MR. STERNLIGHT. There were some that took losses, too, butthey were rather modest--certainly modest against their own capitalstrength.MR. PARTEE. What about the implications for this clearingagent? I guess they were going out of the business anyway? Is thatright?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. The firm that was doing the clearingfor them was already in the process of unwinding its clearingoperations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other matters to raise forMr. Sternlight, we'll turn to Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I would just like to raise a question--not on thecurrent holdings of Farm Credit Bank bonds--but whether adding tothose holdings is appropriate. I don't know what the credit status ofthose bonds is but everything I hear leads me to believe that thereare some questions about it. It is conceivable that we might get intoa position later on where we will have to be financing that and wecould be in the awkward position of holding the bonds and having addedto the bond holdings during the year and at the same time we would befinancing it. I just raise the question as to whether this isappropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The quid pro quo of your comment is thatit is not appropriate?MR. KEEHN. I would think that if there is any substantialquestion about the credit standing of the Farm Credit Banks, maybe itwould be appropriate not to be adding to those holdings.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't added for some time, have we?MR. STERNLIGHT. We have rolled over maturing holdings ofagency issues but we have not added to holdings of agency issues for acouple of years now, Mr. Chairman. We have been watching the spreadsin the agency market because we were concerned about just these kindsof questions. And in the eyes of the market--although we hear of anoccasional case where an investor or two wants to reduce its exposurethere--in general those spreads are holding quite narrowly for FarmCredit [issues] and for [those of] the other agencies too. In fact,one could probably raise questions about all of those agencysecurities--those of the Home Loan Banks or of Fannie Mae, which havehad some loss experience. But in general those spreads are holding upvery well and the Farm Credit Banks have been putting on a strong, andto me a fairly convincing campaign, to the effect that the system as awhole has quite a lot of strength in it. There was one IntermediateCredit Bank in Spokane that needed help from the rest of the systembut in general they present what seems to the market--and to me inwhat I've seen--a fairly good picture.MR. GRAMLEY. Do we have any maturing Farm Credit issuescoming due in the near future?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.3/26/85MR. GRAMLEY. That, I suppose, would be the critical issuethat we face.MR. STERNLIGHT. We typically roll over the maturing onesinto similar amounts.MR. GRAMLEY. What do we have in the near term in thatrespect?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't have a figure in my head.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see how we can't roll over theones we have.MR. GRAMLEY. I don't either.MR. PARTEE. That would show up, wouldn't it?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think very [unintelligible] in the market.I think it would tend to detract from the--MR. PARTEE. I certainly agree with Peter that the otheragencies seem to me at least as weak, if not weaker, than the FarmCredit Banks. Maybe I think that because they do have a very strongcapital position. It's true that they have the largest concentrationof loans of a potentially bad quality of anybody in the country, butthey have very good capital.MR. MARTIN. It's debatable.MR. PARTEE. So, it seems to me that we shouldn't do anythingthat would create a backing away, Si, although I don't think I wouldbuy any more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is more than the occasional investornot buying these things. Every country banker you talk to says he iskicking them out. In total they're not big enough to affect themarket. I think these agencies are anomalous institutions anyway, andI would just as soon we didn't hold any or buy any. But we have ahistory [of doing so]. My own feeling is similar to what Mr. Keehnhas expressed: We would be in an awkward position if we ended uplending to them and buying [their obligations] in the open market atthe same time. If, say, we buy them now, that could be interpreted assupport in a way that may or may not be desirable. I think we have tosupport them if they get in trouble; but I'm not sure we should betreating their securities as the equivalent of government securities,which is what they would like us to do and which we did for awhile--still do, I guess, in some sense. Anyway, I guess we are doing whatyou are suggesting, Mr. Keehn.MR. PARTEE. That is, we avoid buying net new issues.MR. KEEHN. Well, I think the attitude [should be] to try toreduce gradually our holdings without creating any tremor in themarket.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we can reduce them in thisparticular year.3/26/85MR. KEEHN. I don't mean by selling. But where it ispossible without creating any market image problems, that seems to meappropriate.MR. GUFFEY. I, on the other hand, wouldn't view that asbeing an appropriate role. I think we should stay with them and evenat times support them. We're going to support them if they go downanyway. Although I wouldn't make an overt market entry. I'd sure hateto back away from them at this point. I think the statement by Peterthat they show a good market presence and that they are able toattract funds at good rates now may be more PR than it is real. And Iwould hate for us to be a disruptive force by backing away from them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see how we can back away.MR. PARTEE. Their total debt has been declining sharply. Ithas been rather fortunate that their debt has been running off aspotential buyers have run off also. It could be a fairly delicatesituation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure it's running off all thatmuch; some of that is seasonal.MR. PARTEE. Well, but it was a billion dollars.MR. STERNLIGHT. It's about flat. There might have been amodest decline, but I don't think it was a big decline. Theycertainly have not been net money raisers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They were anticipating having to raisemoney from about now on, if I remember correctly. They had a flatperiod or a slight decline that would be natural but it would go upseasonally. Well, we have to ratify the transactions. [Approvedwithout objection.] Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it all sounded rather complicated.I'm not sure of the message that emerged, but I'm sure that we are ina situation without any precedent in our lifetimes in many respects.There is instability in exchange rates and domestic financial markets,a very high dollar, an enormous budget deficit, and an enormous andgrowing trade deficit. Services are doing fine and the rest of theeconomy is not doing so well. What do you make out of it?MR. RICE. Well, I thought the message was clearer than usualfrom Mr. Axilrod.MR. GRAMLEY. I thought Mr. Axilrod's message was that thereis no way to get there from here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without concentrating on the precisegrowth paths and the precise monetary policy decision, how do youassess the situation generally in the economy and financial markets,and what are the broad implications?3/26/85MR. WALLICH. I find somewhat deplorable the way in which thelatest number always dominates the year's forecast. Earlier in theyear there was a widespread upgrading of projections for the year.Now we've had a month of relatively weak numbers and everybody isbacktracking. I think one has to expect that with a moderate rate ofgrowth the numbers will not always be strongly in one direction or theother and perhaps restrain one's eagerness always to take the latestnumbers into account. I'm speaking to market forecasters. I would bewilling to say we have made what seems to be a reasonable projection.Until there is pretty clear evidence that it is going off track weought to stick by that and not follow the monthly ups and downs.MR. MARTIN. But, Henry, I would suggest to you that it isn'tjust a monthly up and down. In the Greenbook, the staff has reviseddownward the first-quarter data and has revised downward certain otherdata that apply to periods of more than a month. They are looking ata 3.3 percent real growth number, which is down something like 10percent. Certainly, the caveats are more imbedded in the materialthat is being reviewed than was true in February. We have just heardcaveats with regard to business fixed investment. I would agree withthose and add the comment, for whatever it's worth, that if I todaystill had the responsibility for Homart Development Co., I would notbe starting one office building, one shopping center of any size, orone multiple unit dwelling in the United States of America. If youlook at the curve of the starts in that area, it suggests somethingthat is headed for explosion--an explosion downward. Okay, animplosion. That curve is just unsustainable in that part of theinvestment area broadly defined. We have seen since mid-1984 adecline in orders in category after category of business fixedinvestments. It's not just technology and it's not just heavyindustry; it's virtually across the board. And it seems to me that a6 percent growth in business fixed investment, broadly defined, for1985 is just getting to be a less and less probable event.I would add to that the fragilities that were alluded to. Ifyou pick up The Wall Street Journal this morning, there is a storyabout a major Canadian bank. Are we going to go a month without alarge financial institution surprising the markets? Are we going togo two or three weeks without or some bank coming upwith another $70 million loss in Paraguay or Ecuador or somewhere?This drumbeat of negative news is having its effect, if you canbelieve the part of the surveys of consumer attitudes toward financialinstitutions and finance. It seems to me that we have a very slow--not a moderate--growth, a very fragile financial system, and a verydubious [outlook for] business fixed investment, housing, and non-residential investment. We are looking at a very vulnerable year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make a few comments, partlyreinforced by going to a few board of directors meetings of variousFederal Reserve Banks recently and hearing businessmen from theindustrial sector of the economy talking. I think there are quitedifferent trends in the industrial sector and elsewhere in theeconomy. But I don't think there is any doubt that the present tradepicture and the prospects for the trade picture are having effects.The question is whether it is cutting the legs off of any expansion inthat area or worse. We have seen the analysis. We have seen theevent in the past couple of years where a lot of domestic demand hasgone abroad, perhaps most strikingly in the area of investment goods.-8-3/26/85I think the question now--and the answer is not fully ascertainablebut there are some symptoms--is whether the level of the dollar andthe competitiveness of foreign goods are cutting investmentexpenditures--not just the supply of investment spending but thewillingness to invest at all. Well, I mean "at all" as a relativeterm; let me say "at anything like the momentum that it had before."We have had a long series of production and orders figures that, withthe exception of February which had some recovery, have been prettyflat. I don't have the sense, and computer manufacturers don't seemto have the sense, that there is any great thrust anymore in that areaof the economy that had been the strongest. Now, that may be partlybecause supply conditions have increased but the indications are forless robustness there. And, of course, in many other areas of heavierequipment there wasn't much recovery at all anyway. In the commercialconstruction area that Governor Martin alluded to, the current figuresare still going up strongly but it's hard to believe that they aregoing to go up indefinitely. New single-family housing is doing allright and could continue to do all right; I don't know how much of anexpansionary force it is going to be. The mining and energy areasdon't seem to be going anyplace, to put it kindly. I don't think thefarmers are going to be a great source of expansionary thrust in theeconomy in terms of what they buy. So that's just reinforcing all thequestions that already have been cited on the investment side.In the meanwhile, consumption so far is doing all right andservice spending, of course, goes on. I might mention automobiles,which are doing just fine, but I don't know whether there are anyprospects for any increases there partly because if the demandincreased, I don't think the manufacturers--many of whom are more[unintelligible]--want to either increase capacity or employment inthat industry. They have gone about as far they are going to go. Ifthere are going to be any more cars sold, my sense is that they aregoing to be imported. So, while that's been a good area, it's not anarea of great upward thrust. I can't avoid having the feeling thatthe kind of forecast the staff has may be as reasonable as otherforecasts, as we always say, but it looks to me like something withinthe limits of a ceiling. It's hard to see where we can get morethrust out of the economy than they are projecting and I can seeconditions arising, particularly on the import side, that mightundercut the kind of forecast they have.On the inflation side, I think we also have a two-sidedsituation. On the services side, prices tend to go up with somemomentum, and I'm not sure that's going to change. I'm sure it's notgoing to change much in the short run; it may be getting a littlebetter but it's not suddenly going to turn toward stability. Priceson the goods side of the economy are basically flat. So, it's alittle hard to see in these circumstances--and I'm assuming no majorchanges in monetary policy, fiscal policy, the dollar, and foreigndevelopments--any great break-out there. Of course, we have thebackground of the financial strains that have been mentioned. I'll atleast stop there and you can all shoot at that analysis. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. One of the frustrating things about the economyis that it's so hard just to grab a simple summary of what it is thatis going on. I think that already has been made clear in thisdiscussion. There is just so much variability; there is just nonational statement one could make about whether things are good or3/26/85whether things are bad. Just to add to the complexity, I sense thatin my District--which I suppose for 15 years or so has been more orless a laggard in the economy--some of this prosperity that has beenin New England is beginning to drop down into the Mid-Atlantic states.So, we seem to be shifting our position among regions in the nationaleconomy. One just senses that things are probably a little better onaverage in the Middle Atlantic states than they are in some otherparts of the country. But even within that relatively small areathere are some real pockets of depression and unemployment inindustry. If you look at agriculture, Si and Roger probably willcontinue to talk about the serious problems there; yet if you talk tofarmers in Pennsylvania or in Delaware, they generally feel prettygood about the situation, and they are in considerably better shapethan farmers elsewhere. So, it's this variability that I think is sofrustrating. One isn't able to get a good handle on what is going onin any satisfying sense, and I think that variability causes a greatdeal of vulnerability in some particular areas.Let me just add a couple of points about imports. I amfinding that [issue raised] at every meeting I attend--in small townsand big cities, with people in small business and big business. Thisimport problem is quickly becoming much more of a political problemthan an economic problem. Some of the Congressmen in my area, whomI've seen recently and who understand all the problems of traderestraint and all the good economic reasons why you don't want to dothat, tell me that the political pressure is just getting so greatthey are not sure that they can resist doing something that they knowisn't a very good idea. I think that is an indication of howwidespread this is.The financial fragility issue, I think, is a ratherinteresting one. We are very close in Pennsylvania to Ohio. Therewas not any noticeable spillover, although it did raise consumeranxiety. Our institutions received lots of telephone calls but noreal withdrawals occurred. But I think there is a difference. Ithink because of Ohio the financial fragility is more serious now thanit was three weeks ago because the ordinary person understands itmore. The ordinary person doesn't really understand governmentsecurities markets or international debt problems, but he doesunderstand lines and the concern that he can't get his money out. SoI think there is a new dimension to this fragility.Having made those observations, my general sense is that theeconomy is growing. I don't think that we're going to have arecession; I think it is growing. I do not sense any inflationaryproblems or any increase in inflation. So, without getting veryspecific about monetary policy, it seems to me that this is a goodtime not to do anything--just to stay where we are and not rock theboat from this quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the Greenbookprojections for the first quarter and also for the rest of the yearare pretty reasonable. I think, as Henry Wallich stated, that thereis a tendency on our part to look at the most recent news inparticular, and I think people have been focusing on the flash reportfor GNP. But if you look behind that and see that the survey on-10-3/26/85employment was taken during a bad week, it suggests that employment isprobably a little stronger than the figures showed. As you mentioned,the consumer seems to be fairly strong and is spending withconfidence, so that looks fairly good. So all in all, it looks to melike a pretty darn good performance for this stage of a businesscycle; and it would be particularly good if we can count on inflationstaying down.To me the policy implications stemming from that are that weought to continue the same sort of policy we have been following thelast several years. I wouldn't claim that the entire favorableoutcome in the economy generally has been due solely to [monetary]policy, but I think it has done an awful lot to overcome the negativeeffects of the federal deficit on business confidence and thefinancial markets. And it probably also has helped to hold downinflationary pressures, although I think it is always important tokeep in mind that a 4 percent inflation rate--or whatever the realrate is--is not really success over inflation in any sense. So, withthat relatively optimistic view in mind, in relation to what some ofthe others have said around this table, I think a high priority oughtto be given to trying to maintain the same sort of policy we've beenfollowing in the past. I would be very concerned if M1 were to moveup above the upper band--not just out of the cone but above the upperband--or if we were to target something above that. I would bewilling to tolerate a little less accommodative policy if necessary.I think the strength in the dollar is more or less preordained by thefiscal situation; if we try to resist that very much, we may findourselves unleashing inflation a little more. So, I guess I'mconsiderably more hawkish than most of the people who have spoken thusfar.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, like some of the others, I think thefinancial fragility is the new and potentially disruptive developmentthat we're having in the economy. The Ohio situation, of course, didget a lot of national publicity--far more than Mississippi did eightyears ago. That indicates something of the kind of concerns thatpeople could have, but it's not the only thing. At our last meetingwe were very much steeped and involved in the question of agriculturalfinance. Now, I don't think that has improved any in this period oftime; it's just that Ohio took precedence over it and got moreattention. The general savings and loan situation is pretty weak, aswe all know, and the Home Loan Bank Board has been working hard to tryto cut back on some of the lending that is totally unwarranted thathas been done there. We're still subject to accidents, and not justlike ESM. I noticed, Bob, that the strongest Texas bank reported inthe last couple of days a surprising loss in loans to its directors;and it's just [without] question about the best of the Texas banks.Of course, is probably accident prone, and who knowswhat the next thing might be that will affect them. My view of thematter is that this probably will be affecting both peoples' attitudestoward the stability of finance and also the attitudes of lenderstoward what their posture ought to be. I don't think it's at all asecret that the Comptroller of the Currency is taking a much tougherview in examinations now; he is classifying a lot more loans. And thenational banks have a lot of exposure out there now that they didn'thave a couple of years ago. I think that affects their attitudes and-11-3/26/85the Home Loan Bank Board is affecting S&L attitudes. So, both on thelending side--the availability of credit, which is something thatSteve mentioned--and in terms of public attitudes, we have a new riskthat I think has grown with the passage of time. And that probablywill be reflected by a change in liquidity preferences. There is alittle of that apparently in the market with Ohio but it could becomevery much stronger at some point in the future. I think it makes lessdependable--not that they are dependable ever--but less dependablethan usual the observation of the monetary numbers, because we don'tknow what kinds of attitudinal changes might be reflected in thosenumbers now or in the period ahead. I don't disagree with the staffforecast as a normative forecast. But I do think that the risks,stemming largely from the financial side, are on the down side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I think Henry's point about looking over alonger period and not judging where the economy is going by lastmonth's statistics is one that is worth repeating. If one looks atthe first-quarter flash [for GNP] and compares it with where we are inthe second quarter--during which time we have had a lot of erraticnumbers--we're looking at growth of aggregate demand of around 3-3/4percent and the growth of GNP is between 2-1/2 and 2-3/4 percentbecause we had a big drop in net exports during this period. What thestaff is forecasting basically for the next 3 quarters is acontinuation of that very moderate pace of growth in aggregate demand,a little under 4 percent, and a somewhat better GNP performance ofabout 1/2 percentage point less than the growth of aggregate demandbecause net exports are not going to drop so much. And that seems tome a reasonable forecast for the moment. I certainly agree that thisconfidence factor is one that's difficult to appraise, but presumablythe staff thought about this in the process of putting together itsforecast. I would remind you all that the increase in business fixedinvestment that they are talking about is a very, very substantialslowdown from what we saw in the first two years of recovery. In thefirst two years of recovery we have seen an increase in real businessfixed investment of over 30 percent--a tremendous increase. And partof this forecast is a consequence, I think, of the erosion ofconfidence that has occurred. If you ask yourself what has happenedtypically in the third year of recovery in business fixed investment,typically it continues to go up and it does so even though corporateprofits flatten out. The big difference besides the confidence factorthis time is the fact that we have been looking at an actual declinein the rate of capacity utilization in manufacturing since the middleof last year. I would be inclined to give that some weight, but notan undue weight, because this is a recovery--as I would appraise it atleast--in which the growth of business fixed investment by and largehas not been related in any close way to the need for additionalcapacity. It has been replacement investment; it has been investmentdesigned to cut costs and improve productivity; it has been investmentdriven very heavily by tax incentives and by technology. Having saidall that, I would still come out--although I am a little less gloomythan the Chairman is--with the view that this is a forecast for whichthe risks are predominately on the down side. I don't see any seriousconcern that we're going to have more growth of aggregate demandduring the course of 1985 and early 1986 than we would want.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.-12-3/26/85MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I find myself pretty much inagreement with many of the things that you pointed to, though I don'tknow if I would describe that as excessively gloomy. It depends uponthe point of view from which you look at these things. There is apoint that you made, which Lyle also pointed out, that I'd like toemphasize, and that is that the staff forecast is probably the best wecan hope for. The risks to the forecast seem to me to be on the downside. Looking at the economy, it is very hard to see where a kick tothe growth could occur. All the factors pointed to by the Chairmansuggest that any higher growth rate than the one projected by thestaff just seems to be unlikely. Now having said that, I do think thestaff forecast for the short run is a good one. I think the currentrate of expansion is probably a comfortable one but there are thesevulnerabilities that Pres pointed to. Although the Chairman pointedout that consumer expenditures are really the main source of strengthin the economy, it seems to me that as we go out into the year--intothe second half--that there is some risk that consumer spending maynot hold up. While as of now it seems possible to maintain currentrates of growth, declining over time, I wouldn't be surprised at allif in fact the result of these vulnerabilities coming from declines ofinvestment and also the lagged effect of import [penetration] onactivity in the economy all add up to much lower rates of growthtoward the end of the year than we expect at the present time. Justto summarize, I would say that while the staff forecast seems to me atthis time to be the most likely outcome, we have to be prepared to seesignificantly lower rates of growth than forecast.As far as the fragility of the financial system, I was muchmore worried about that a week ago than I am today. I'm encouraged bythe way the market has accepted the developments in Ohio and I'mencouraged by the way the people in Ohio have accepted what's going onthere. So I'm not as worried as I might have been. While there arethese threats to confidence, I would not at this point allow myconcern about fragility in the system to influence my monetary policyprescription.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern has a special burden to saysomething fresh and insightful!MR. STERN. I don't know if that's good or bad! I don'tthink there is any doubt that we have a two-tiered economy or whateveryou want to call it. In our District, probably the best way to put itis an urban versus a rural split. The urban economies generally aredoing rather well. The rural economies, because of agriculture andmining and some problems in timber, are not doing well and, obviously,that's where the fragility is.Looking at the aggregate picture, though, I must say thatwith the exception of the February employment and hours statistics inmanufacturing I thought the statistics were reasonably positive interms of retail sales, housing, and continuing increases in commercialconstruction and so forth. And with that interpretation, I'm notinclined at this point to change my view of the outlook for thebalance of the year very much. I continue to think that the economyprobably will do somewhat better than the Greenbook forecast. I admitthat, yes, there are a lot of uncertainties. But if I were to look atit sector by sector, I would come out with a sense that the interest-sensitive sectors might do a little better than the Greenbook-13-3/26/85suggests. I would simply note that nominal interest rates today--realrates, of course, are difficult to gauge--are anywhere from a pointand half to three points below their peaks of last year, and of coursethe economy did well last year. So, one should take that into[account in formulating] monetary policy in general. I agree thatthere are a lot of things that we have to be sensitive to in terms ofdomestic and international market factors and problems in specificinstitutions and in specific sectors of the economy. But I'm a littleconcerned; we don't want to tolerate excessive expansion in money--probably under any circumstances--but as an antidote to some of thosethings.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'll start with my ownDistrict. I think what I'm seeing and hearing is relatively stronggrowth on average, although there are some weak spots bothgeographically and in various sectors of that economy. But I'mhearing a lot of confidence even in those areas where economicperformance hasn't been all that strong. There has been no spilloverat all from the ESM or the Ohio thrift situations that I can tell. Wehave had some panicky questions from old ladies who had money inFlorida thrifts, but there was no run on any of those institutions andno problems.As I looked at the national economy, I was somewhat surprisedby the lower growth rate of GNP--the 2.1 percent flash that came out.But, given the weather situation in February and some other factors,my hunch is that that might be revised up somewhat. I was moreconcerned, frankly, about the flash number for the deflator, at 5.4percent. I don't know whether the staff considers that to be a flukeor whether it represents a bottoming out of inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is an artificial statistic that isvirtually meaningless--not economics.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, people seem to look at it in any event.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So people look at it. It's not reflectedin any other inflation figures.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, whether it's economically significantor not, if there are other factors in the economy that represent anincrease in inflation or inflationary expectations, I think that issomething we have to be concerned about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You might just address yourself to thatfigure, Mr. Kichline. I don't think you mentioned it. I hope yourconclusion is similar to mine.MR. KICHLINE. I'll get around to that. In terms of theprice side, for the fixed-weight measure we have 3.1 percent and theyhave 3.3 percent, so we're off by two-tenths. All of this isattributable to shifting weights--and Mr. Truman's area is part of theproblem because it's a quirky thing having to do with oil importsbeing subtracted out on the import side. We imported less oil andthere is no offset showing up in inventories. So, whether or not itis entirely statistical like that--. It may indeed be revised away.-14-3/26/85If not, we would anticipate that the following quarter we could besurprised with a more favorable outcome.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have virtually no increase in producerprices this quarter, apparently a moderately low increase in consumerprices, and the fixed-weight index declined or actually, I guess,stayed the same. I don't think you should worry too much about theGNP deflator.MR. BLACK. Does this mean, Jim, that you think the real partmight be a little larger?MR. KICHLINE. No. You mean in terms of the current quarter,right? I think basically what is happening is that they have takensomething out in one place and they don't see it appearing in anotherplace. When all is said and done, it may well be that we will getlower nominal and somewhat lower prices.MR. BLACK. At about the same real--?MR. KICHLINE. Correct. Well, we have a real number that'shigher than their 2.1 percent, so that's open to question--whether itwill get revised up or whether we are wrong.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're expecting a higher real number andthey say that real is going to be too low. Maybe it will be, but whenyou look at the assumptions they have made to put that figure togetheryou're not automatically led to that conclusion. They assume that thetrade balance will diminish from the January figure to a not very highlevel. All that has to happen is to have a higher trade balance. Ifit ran at the January level, that's going to knock off half the GNPgrowth that they have. They have no cutback in inventoryaccumulation; in fact, they have a slight increase from the Januarylevel, if I remember. These are figures they don't know at all andnobody knows at all. But just glancing at it and making somejudgment, I don't think you can argue that the assumptions they havemade are wildly on the down side. If I were making those assumptions,I would make them the other way. We just don't know what the tradebalance is and [whether] production is flat or down.MR. FORRESTAL. In any event, although I would lower mygeneral thinking about GNP somewhat as a result of what has happenedin the first quarter, I'm in general agreement with the forecast inthe Greenbook. I personally think that the outlook for 1985 stilllooks pretty comfortable. Perhaps, as has been alluded to hereearlier, the markets and market observers have become used to somerather high numbers in terms of GNP, and when the numbers move down tothe trend rate people get a little excited. I'm not sure we should dothat. I think we have to adjust our thinking to lower rates of growthand the view that those lower rates of growth are not necessarily bad.So, I'm not particularly gloomy about 1985. I think we're going tocontinue to have good sustainable growth in the economy. The forecastfor the dollar, I suppose, is as reasonable as one can think at thistime.I would just like to repeat something that was said earlier.In my District, too, I continue to hear over and over again this cryfor protectionism as a result of imports, particularly in the textile-15-3/26/85and apparel industries. Indeed, some bills already have beenintroduced by Georgia Congressmen with respect to those industries.My real concern relates to the fragility question but not so muchbecause of what happened in Ohio. There apparently hasn't been anyparticular spillover from that, except perhaps in attitudes; I am moreconcerned about the state of the thrift industry generally, includinginsured thrifts. We have that FCA situation overhanging the market,and I think that is a very serious concern that I'm sure we all share.In terms of what this means for monetary policy, I think we shouldcertainly not do anything to loosen policy. My own preference wouldbe a very slight tightening of policy. I won't go into any specificsat this point but I would like to see us at least hold where we areand perhaps move a bit more toward a tightening posture.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As far as the economy is concerned,I too have a pretty murky crystal ball at this time. We have aforecast that actually is a couple tenths stronger than the Greenbookforecast in terms of real GNP. I don't see any particular reason tochange that right now, although I would concede that the balance ofrisks at this point seems to be on the down side rather than the upside. I do think that business attitudes, and perhaps consumerattitudes as well, have soured a bit even since we met last. As hasalready been said, part of that reflects the now broad-based--vergingon universal--concerns about imports and the way in which they areaffecting the domestic economy. I myself also sense a renewed senseof skepticism, notwithstanding Mr. Domenici's efforts, on the budget.At this point I think that skepticism, at least as it reaches me, isbordering on cynicism. Obviously, the Ohio situation and relatedproblems have taken some toll; I'll get back to that in a minute.On the price side, I don't pay any attention to the GNPdeflator but I must confess in dissecting the producer and consumerprice indexes for the last couple of months, I do see a couple ofthings there that bother me. I can't imagine why they are there. Forexample, in the wholesale area for finished goods--or producer goodsor whatever we call them now--there was a detectable uptick in therate of increase in both January and February, which gets sloughed offas being used cars one month and something else another month. I seea little of the same thing, again hardly detectable, in the consumerarea. Neither of those things in and of themselves is of greatconcern; but they are of concern in the sense that I can't imagine whythey are there at all under the current circumstances.I certainly would associate myself with those who say that insome ways the greatest concern right now is this financial fragility.But I end up a little differently than some who have spoken. I mustsay I am very hard pressed, notwithstanding the efforts of theComptroller and others, to see any renewed burst of conservatism ordiscipline in lending policies and financial market practices ingeneral. If you look at just the growth of total credit, you don'tsee it. If you look at the ways in which activities are beingfinanced off balance sheets and so forth, you don't see it. To thecontrary, you can still find--without looking very hard--instances inwhich banking organizations are moving in the direction of moreliberal lending policies in a very deliberate sense. So I would have,if anything, more concern there in that I do not see any real hard-16-3/26/85pervasive evidence of the kind of discipline in the financial sectorthat I think we ultimately are going to need. So far as the Ohiosituation is concerned, I think the jury is still out. Karen probablyknows more than I do about this, but it seems to me a distinctpossibility that we still are facing a situation in which smalldepositors may end up losing money. If indeed that is the case, Iwould suggest that the jury may still be out in terms of thepsychology of that and how that plays out over time. I'm not surewhat to do about these financial soft spots. On the one hand, youmight argue that a more accommodative policy would help; but to theextent that underlying discipline isn't there in the first place, Isuppose you could argue that a more accommodative policy could hurtthem. I'm not sure that we can solve that problem by the conventionalkind of wiggles in monetary policy. But I think it is a very, verysignificant overhang on the overall situation right now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, it has been made pretty clear, Mr.Chairman, that in some ways trying to describe the economy is like theblind man trying to describe the elephant: It depends on what part ofthe beast you have hold of. I don't think we should be too surprisedabout what's going on in the world, or at least in the United Statesthese days, in the sense that some academicians over the years havemade it pretty clear that in an open economy, which we have, and withfloating exchange rates, which we have, and with few if anyinhibitions on capital flows, which is the case, that over time thestimulus coming from a fiscal deficit will be offset largely by adeteriorating foreign trade situation. That pretty well describeswhat has been going on now for some time in the United States. Theweakness in industrial production and the weakness in manufacturingemployment that we are seeing simply [unintelligible] that domesticadjustment for our foreign trade weakness. I suspect we're going tosee more rather than less of that. The judgment really comes down towhat one thinks is going to happen in the remaining months of thisyear. Just in the time of the 6 weeks since our last meeting ourstaff has become somewhat more pessimistic than the Board's staff;they wouldn't be surprised to see a second half in which the GNP isgrowing very slowly and may possibly even be flat. The basis for thatrather pessimistic conclusion is the judgment--with which one couldeasily quarrel, and I assume the staff here would quarrel with it--that the dollar will continue to be strong. Their judgment is that itis not going to weaken appreciably and that the foreign tradesituation will continue to deteriorate. Now, as I said, that's ajudgment that is controversial, but that's why our particular staffforecast this month is markedly less optimistic than last month andless optimistic than the Board staff's forecast.Having said all that, I don't really believe that there is anawful lot that we can do through monetary policy that we haven'talready done. We have been pretty generous in the provision ofmonetary and credit growth. I don't think there is an awful lot morewe can do to run an expansive monetary policy to cure this enormousimbalance that you and others have so well described on the fiscalside. The bottom line is that I would be one of those to say this isno time to rock the boat. It's not any time to be squeezing down onmonetary growth, and I also wouldn't be in favor of trying toaccelerate beyond what we've already done. I would feel comfortable-17-3/26/85with coasting along near the upper end of this band, as we have been,for the balance of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, when the Ohio situationbroke, I was very concerned because in Massachusetts we have more non-federally insured deposits in savings banks alone [than in Ohio] andthen another $5 billion in cooperative banks and credit unions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're all run by good conservativeYankees!MR. MORRIS. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They used to be anyway.MR. MORRIS. I tried 10 years ago, in collaboration with thebank commissioner, to get a bill through requiring federal depositinsurance on all depository institutions in the state. I didn't getvery far. I was afraid in this instance that we'd have a story in theBoston Globe to the effect that what is happening in Ohio is nothingcompared to what could happen in Massachusetts and that the paperwould list all of the uninsured banks and so on. That hasn'thappened. While several of the banks substantially increased theircurrency orders to be ready for a run, the run has not happened. Butwe have had one positive effect from it so far, and that is that about25 of these institutions have applied for FDIC insurance. Most ofthem are the larger banks and most of them are in pretty good shape,so I don't think there's any question about their getting insurance.If we get enough of them signed up, I think the $400 million fund thatwe have will be able to take care of the smaller institutions and wewon't have a situation in Massachusetts where the failure of oneinstitution could absorb the whole fund.On the economic side, Mr. Chairman, you're right that thecomputer industry is suffering a little slowdown here. But I thinkthat's a reflection not only of an economic slowdown in general but ofthe fact that this industry had enormous growth last year. Whereas ayear ago there was a shortage of semiconductors, now there's a glut;and there's a glut of computer hardware in general. But I noted thatin February there was a big increase in new orders for computers; itcould be that we're coming to the end of that inventory adjustmentproblem. A month ago I took the position that I thought the economywould do better than the staff projection. I still feel that way, butthe evidence coming in during the past month certainly has not lentany support to my position. I had expected a much bigger bounce fromthe decline in interest rates than we have gotten. The decline ininterest rates may have increased the demand for money but it doesn'tseem to have increased the demand for goods and services. Just why wehave had such a modest response to what was a fairly substantialdecline in interest rates is not very clear to me. So, I'm inclinedto have the same view as Ed Boehne: that despite the growth of M1,which has often not been a very good indicator for monetary policy inrecent years, it would be wise for us to sit still until we see howthe numbers for the real economy are going to go. As I said, theyhave been difficult for me to understand in the light of the declinein interest rates, the strength of the stock market, and other-18-3/26/85indicators that had suggested an upturn in the animal spirits. That'snot showing through in the market place, and maybe it will, but untilthen--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suggest to you that imports are a greatantidote to animal spirits.MR. MORRIS. Yes, I think you're quite right. You're alsoright in saying we are in an unprecedented situation here. I don'tthink our economic history can tell us an awful lot about what theprobable future is going to hold when the basic conditions are so outof line with anything we have ever seen before. That again, Isuppose, is an argument for not making any big move here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, the snow is gone in Chicago and I wasfeeling pretty good until I got here! I think any comments I wouldmake on the economic scene are probably consistent with what I've saidat previous meetings. The expansion in the Middle West continues,albeit at a more modest rate than is true with regard to the nationalfigures. But these imbalances also continue. Some of the goodbusinesses are doing quite well; autos and retail sales are examplesof that and they anticipate a good year. The bad businesses, though,are not doing well. In some cases they are really doing very, verybadly. Agriculture and anything to do with agriculture--capitalgoods, machine tools, and the like--are examples of that.A couple of more specific comments: Consistent with whatother people have suggested, I certainly am hearing more and moreabout the impact this high value of the dollar is having with regardto both imports and exports. And I think there's somewhat of a grim,growing realization with the passage of time that the impact caused bythis is becoming a little more permanent. There is an awful lot offoreign inventory that has been shipped and is wandering around thecountry. Distribution channels by and large are in place and I thinkhave been established in a way that is going to be very difficult tobreak. A lot of production facilities have been closed; I thinkthat's another way of saying that we may have become more dependent onforeign markets than we earlier realized. And I think there's agrowing realization of that. Another mini-comment regarding theeconomic outlook relates to railroad car loadings. I was talking tothe CEO of a large company the other day that has a major operatingrailroad and he commented that this is the third consecutive month ofdecline in car loadings after 18 consecutive months of increases.There is some noise in the numbers; trucks and barges are taking abigger part of all this and it's a little hard to track that. Butstill, there are some commodities that don't lend themselves to eithertruck or barge traffic that are showing declines. This guy would notsuggest that this is a forecast of a turn in the economy.Nonetheless, in the past, it has been a pretty good indicator and Ithink it's something we ought to keep our eye on.MR. PARTEE. Is that year-over-year, Si?MR. KEEHN. Yes, year-over-year. Turning to monetary policy,it does seem to me that despite these cautionary comments, no one thatI talk to is suggesting that we face a recession. I think they can-19-3/26/85see far enough through the year with regard to their order books andbacklogs that they anticipate a continuation of the expansion. Itdoes seem to me that growth in the aggregates has been pretty strong--although perhaps March will come in at a lower number--and that unlesswe begin to take some corrective actions here and now, we could be ina position later on of having to be a bit more abrupt. Therefore, I'dsuggest not something overt but just a little gentle leaning to beginto be sure that we do have control of the aggregates and to precludethe possibility of inflationary pressures later on in the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, it's becoming increasinglydifficult to remain optimistic.SPEAKER(?). Gee whiz!MR. BOEHNE. That's the worst comment I've heard all day!MR. BOYKIN. In our District, the economy continues toadvance slowly. There are areas of concern. Obviously, the energypicture is pretty cloudy right now; you've all read about that. Rigsin Texas are down close to 9 percent over a year ago. While there hasbeen a little stability in the oil price situation, most of the peopleI've talked to are not very optimistic. The construction side, onbalance, is fairly stable; but that's rather misleading becausemultifamily units have taken a real nose dive. On the other hand, ourcommercial construction activity is picking up and that had been goingat a fairly torrid pace down our way anyway.The banks, in increasing their lending, have shown rathersignificant expansion in loans and in the real estate area. Chuckmade reference to one of our major banking organizations getting inthe press. They have, of course, but that came right on the heels ofthe Ohio situation. But our other bank holding companies, both majorand second-tier, also have been in the press. We had a fairlysignificant merger called off because [unintelligible] the conditionof the two marriage partners, and they decided they had better gotheir own way. Our largest bank holding company has been in somewhatof a holding pattern and is trying to remain as quiet as possible. Inthe second-tier group, we have holding companies in Dallas that haveall of their problems, including the infighting within theirmanagements, being aired in the newspapers. We have a similarsituation with a holding company out in New Mexico where the chiefexecutive officer has been ousted and he has filed a $35 millionlawsuit. All of this is just being spread everywhere and that doesn'tinstill confidence.On the economy generally, I have not picked up many commentsindicating that there's real concern that we're going to go intorecession. I have had a few rather disturbing comments made to me--and this is certainly anecdotal--along the lines that, well, mayberight now is a time where a little inflation wouldn't be all that bad.This is coming primarily from real estate developers. The first-quarter GNP was below my expectations. I do remind myself, though,that we have had little surprises from time to time; whether this oneis going to stick or whether it's going to bounce around, I guess ishighly debatable. On the fragility side, much as Jerry said, I'm not-20-3/26/85too sure that monetary policy can do very much about that, at least inthe current circumstances. I would be satisfied personally to stayjust about where we are on policy. Any tilt on that would probably bein the direction of a bit of concern about the growth in money.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I want to comment briefly on thehousing market outlook, partly because there have been comments whichwere rather optimistic in that area that I want to dissent from. Ifyou follow the secondary market reports, it's clear that fixed-ratemortgage rates have been rising week-by-week. There have been someweeks in which the jump has been 10 or 15 basis points. We are allaware that there is a good deal less use of adjustable rate mortgagesnow. And to the extent that there's a shift in the borrower's purviewhere onto the [lender's], you're talking about a 233 basis pointincrease in the stated rate, going from adjustable to fixed onaverage--at least as far as Freddie Mac data are concerned. Theborrowers who are in the lower down payment category are facing higherprivate mortgage insurance premiums today if they are unfortunateenough to have to use that device. And that premium, of course, goesto the qualification of the borrower as does the higher rate that isshown in the secondary market data. The mortgage insurers arereporting very heavy underwriting losses, which means that theircredit analyses are more severe. Some of these companies are going tolose in last year plus this year an amount equal to their wholecapital base of only a few years ago. So, they are likely to beslightly more conservative in their underwriting. The same commentcan apply to the mortgage originator who faces delinquency ratesstarting with 30-day delinquencies of 5 or 6 or 7 percent--rates theyhave not faced in their whole careers, unless they're up in years abit. And, of course, the rate of foreclosure losses is significant.The motivation of the borrower of having an investment as well asshelter is diminishing in many sections of the country. Indeed, therehas been deflation in housing prices in certain price brackets incertain parts of the country. So, for us to attain the forecast of1.75 million single-family units plus multifamily units I don't thinkis feasible. Added to the investment downside risk, I think, is avery substantial downside risk in housing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just note that prices of plywood havedeclined by 10 to 15 percent in the last two months to the lowestpoint since the [unintelligible] of the recession. Lumber prices arenot doing a lot better than that.MR. MARTIN. A lot of them are Canadian.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That reflects part of the importsituation; no doubt about that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it's not even Canadian; theyare importing timber even from places far more distant than Canada.MR. MARTIN. True, true.MR. PARTEE. How do you feel about multifamilies, Pres?-21-3/26/85MR. MARTIN. Well, the vacancy rate is so high and theoverbuilding is so substantial that, of course, that too is avulnerable market. I don't know how a developer looks on the proposedtax changes. I take it there hasn't been enough debate on those toreverse that hold that it seemed to place on the syndicated apartmentdeveloper.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I agree in general with the staffforecast. I also agree with several people who have said that theinvestment outlook is very crucial to the forecast. A lot of numbersfor sectors and for various orders and so forth have been quoted. Theonly comment I'd add--and in adding this I will say that I reallyhaven't yet revised down substantially my outlook for investment thisyear--is that the longer-term incentives for investment remainfavorable. And I think that, added to the list of the rather mixed orflat [indicators], causes me to think there is still hope in theinvestment area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are those long-term favorableaspects?MS. HORN. Well, they really go back to some of the lawchanges in 1980, if my date is right--the sorts of things that I thinkprobably caused the real return on investment to increase over aperiod of years and gradually put an underlying floor on investmentthat way.Turning to uncertainties, so far I think the Ohio situationhas had a minimal effect on economic activity. Of course, it has hada larger effect on banking structure, but I certainly agree withJerry's statement that the jury is still out there. Of the 71institutions plus Home State that were closed, only about 20 are fullyopen today. As the week passes we expect several more, and perhapsseveral large ones, to be added to that list. But eventually, as thissituation unfolds, there are some that will not qualify for federalinsurance or otherwise qualify to open without recapitalization or, insome cases, that will not be enough and they will have to be merged oracquired successfully in order to keep the depositors whole. Publicconfidence has been running well ever since the Ohio legislaturepassed the act that requires federal insurance, essentially, plus someother ways to reopen. And that is being supported by these [recent]openings. But there will come a time when openings will not be soeasy--if easy is the word, which it isn't--as it has been this week.Then the realization that either it will be or may be difficult tosell some of these institutions could once again come into the publiceye. Having said all that, the financial fragility issue that Ireally worry about is not so much the Ohio one--though there couldstill be surprises down the road on that--but the overall one thatwe've been discussing for months, or maybe even years, around thistable. And the fact that we had a very close look at that in the lastseveral weeks and some groups who don't normally take such a closelook--that is, individuals and consumers--also had a close looksuggests that that group may be particularly sensitive if [they are]hit again. Overall, I do judge the financial fragility issue tocontinue to be very worrisome.-22-3/26/85As for monetary policy, taking all these things together, Iwould very much like not to find myself in a position three monthsfrom now of wanting to make a significant move in monetary policy; andI'd like to end up three months from now in a position where we have agood chance of being in the [monetary growth] ranges by year-end.MR. RICE. Let me just ask if there were any runs on any ofthe S&Ls that did open up?MS. HORN. Of the ones that opened up fully there has been toour knowledge no extraordinary activity whatsoever. Virtually all ofthem are open on this partial payout basis--that is $100 [perwithdrawal] and $750 a month per depositor. In those cases there arefour of them that have had heavy lobby traffic. But of course thewithdrawals are severely limited so the [total] withdrawals are in therealm of reason. And three of those four are ones that hadexperienced runs before the closing. All in all, I'd say so far theoperation has been successful.MR. AXILROD. It should probably be mentioned, Mr. Chairman,in that context that the amount of borrowing related to these thriftshas risen. Counting yesterday, when it rose another $4 million, theamount outstanding is $40.5 million.MS. HORN. I'd add that since they are open for the partialpayouts and such borrowing is permitted to support that activity wewould expect borrowing to increase each day for some time now.MR. BLACK. Karen, if a person has an account in his or hername and a joint account with a spouse--MS. HORN. Each account.MR. BLACK. Each account could get $750.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Garbarini.MR. GARBARINI. Well, Mr. Chairman, given your statementabout the good conservative New England Yankees, I guess it might beargumentative for me to say that I'm from a District that's in theheartland of conservatism. But at least I can say that we arecentrally located and, therefore, somewhat contiguous to almost everyarea of fragility that has been discussed around this table. On theeast we border the problem with savings and loans; on the northeast,central east and northwest, the agriculture problems; and on thesouthwest, the energy situation. However, because of that location wealso touch upon some of the areas that my good friend at the rightdescribed as [experiencing] slow advancement, which can only be slowin terms of the standard of living that they've become accustomed to,I would say. So, when it comes to the economy we get very, very mixedsignals.We recently held our initial meeting of our advisory councilon small business and agriculture and heard some very interestingcomments. We heard everything from statements that the only thingthat will save agriculture is a complete government bailout, tostatements that certain well managed agricultural areas that paidattention to their cash flows are doing very well, to encouraging-23-3/26/85statements that there's still a belief that technologically we havethe capability of competing very well in the agricultural area withanyone in the world. Obviously, there's going to be a period ofproblems for those that did not manage well.I guess those mixed signals, as John Balles said, make itvery difficult to describe the elephant. However, our best estimatewould probably be something along the line of the real GNP growth ofthe staff forecast or perhaps just a little less. Perhaps of moreconcern to me is the fact that our estimate is also for somewhatgreater inflation than the staff sees. And given all of those mixedsignals and uncertainties, I would suggest that perhaps the advisablecourse for the System is to move very slowly and in the areas of itsstrength. Since I also have a slightly different opinion about whatM1 tells us than one good Yankee from New England, I would say weshould watch that very closely, not making moves of any magnitude. Iwould share Karen's concern about having to do something major laterin the year. I certainly wouldn't want to see continued front loadingof money that would cut our flexibility in the second half. On theother hand, I would hope that we would take any opportunity tocontinue with what our strength is, and that is to continue the long-range battle against inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. I want to thank the Chairman for visiting withsome of the same people who have been talking to me for the last sixmonths. If there's one theme that I get from these individuals, it'sbasically that their concerns involve the strong dollar--the surge inimports and the loss of export markets. These people include anyonefrom farmers to manufacturers but are primarily manufacturers. Iheard within just the last couple of weeks, for example, that FordMotors is closing the tractor plant that's right near where I havelived in the Detroit suburbs because they can no longer manufactureprofitably in this country. They're going to move the operationoverseas. I would just like to point out that once these movementsare made they don't quickly reverse course. The dollar could take adive in six months and it's unlikely, in my judgment, that they wouldthen move back. So, I think the longer this goes on the more seriousthe consequences. And I don't think that we should take them lightly.Another thing I'd like to mention involves what I see as therisks in the staff forecast. As a cynic looking at consumer spending,what I see besides a lot of the spending going to imports is a lot ofspending supported by credit--those magic plastic cards and thingslike that. In the auto industry, particularly, there are specialterms--extending from 4 years to 5 years the term on a new car loan inorder to get the monthly payment down sufficiently to qualify a buyer.You're living on borrowed time when that goes on to a very greatdegree. Also, there are tremendous special rate inducements; 8.8percent is one number that you see, again as a means of trying to dragthe people in off the streets and to get the monthly payments down sothat they qualify. I think this is producing some good auto salesnumbers at the moment, but it is the kind of foundation that to melooks like mush. The risk in business fixed investment has beenmentioned by numerous people but I will repeat it. There are highvacancies in office buildings; there are major lags here and I don'tthink we've seen the full impact of these tax reform proposals on-24-3/26/85business spending. In the multifamily residential area, I would sayditto. There are substantial vacancies in apartment buildings and,also, I don't believe the tax response has shown up entirely.In terms of the dominant factors I think we should look at--and maybe this reflects my background, having held their hands andnursed the sick thrifts in 1981 and 1982--I see this fragility of thefinancial system as going far beyond Ohio. It is not that Ohio was anunimportant event. It certainly was a media event and made a lot ofindividuals aware of this problem. But I think there would be a lotof sick people around this country if they knew the condition of therest of the thrifts and if they knew that probably a good 10 percentwill go in the soup between now and sometime next year. And that'snot because of somebody dipping in the till or a governor actingoverly enthusiastically. These are fundamental problems with solvencyand insolvency. And think what that does to FSLIC. To me it's likebeing reinsured by somebody who is three weeks from bankruptcy ratherthan bankrupt already. But I don't think that that word is generallyout and that the problems are generally appreciated.The other factor I think we ought to give primary attentionto in formulating monetary policy is this dollar strength that I'vealready referred to. I would be extremely concerned about any furtherrise in interest rates. I don't care if M1 growth goes to 37 percentnext month, which I don't think it will. But this is the one thing--in case people haven't followed the thrift situation carefully--thatdoes impact on thrifts very directly. It is the one thing that we dohave an influence on that does hurt them or does influence them. Ifthe increase in money market rates that has occurred since the lastFOMC meeting--30 to 75 basis points or whatever it was--would just goon to total one percentage point and if that were factored into thecost of funds for thrifts, it would put somewhere between 50 and 75percent of the industry in a loss situation. And that's on top of theones that are already staring at insolvency. So, I think thatinterest rates are the connecting link and I don't think that we canignore them if we're really concerned about this fragility problem.In fact, if I had been told at the last FOMC meeting that Steve andPeter would have been producing interest rate increases of 30 to 75basis points, I would have dissented. So I hope that our move todaywill be moderate and that whatever we do we will take careful noticeof what our steps are doing and will be doing to interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My comments withregard to the economy are brief. Let me start by saying that we're ingeneral agreement with the staff's forecast. I cannot quarrel withthe comments that have been made that if there's a risk, the risk maybe on the down side and not on the up side, because I don't seeanything that indeed will move us to a higher level of output than hasbeen forecast. Nor do I really see anything on the down side thatwill alter the judgment that that forecast is about right.I would, however, just note that the Tenth District probablyis one of the better illustrations of the imbalances that exist withinthe economy that have been described. For example, on the plus side:we have a fairly large producer of automobiles--I think second in thenation--and that's going full out; the high-tech and defense industry-25-3/26/85is booming; commercial construction, at least in Kansas City andOmaha, is very vigorous. Aircraft production is a big component partof our activity and I've received an interesting report on aircraftmost recently, and that is that the number of aircraft being producedis down, largely because of the inability of the aircraft producers toexport. On the other hand, the dollar volume of aircraft beingproduced and sold is up simply because there has been a switch fromthe smaller type of aircraft back to the business jets, such as turbojets, whose sales were dead in the water a year ago simply becausebusiness wasn't investing in that kind of capital good. So, there areparts of the economy that are faring very well. On the other side, Iwon't belabor the points on the energy, mining, and agricultural areasin which our District is very deeply involved, but all of them areflat on their backs.As for the fragility, there is fragility and it will begin toshow up in the agricultural banks during 1985 as it has in the past.And I think that will accelerate somewhat. But there don't appear tobe situations that can't be managed by the FDIC and by [FCA] andotherwise. But there will be a great deal of discussion about them aswell as about the bankruptcy or the ceasing of business by theimplement dealers, the grain dealers, and others that have been veryimportant to the Main Street merchant in these small agriculturaltowns. And the impact is going to be very great.Just as a matter of personal interest, perhaps, there was asale of a farm of some 700 acres in the little town of Platsburg,Missouri, and some 500 to 600 people showed up--mostly farmers and UAWretired workers--for whatever reason, to protest the sale on thecourthouse steps. The farm was sold amid shouting and there wasviolence; there were 7 or 8 arrested, several injured in the melee,and they damaged the front doors to the courthouse where the sale tookplace. The reason I recite that event is because: (1) it does perhapsportend for the future what may happen as these farm sales increase;and (2) one of our ex-colleagues, Willis Winn, has his home inPlatsburg, Missouri. I don't know that he was in the middle of it,and I doubt that he was.MR. PARTEE. It wasn't his farm was it?MR. GUFFEY. This happened on the 50th anniversary of asimilar event in 1935 in which a federal marshal and his authorized[agents] tried to sell a farm on the courthouse steps of ClintonCounty in Platsburg. It was an unsuccessful sale; the crowd took offhis pants and ran him out of town. They are more sophisticated nowthan they were 50 years ago.Turning to monetary policy: In my judgment, staying aboutwhere we are would be appropriate for the upcoming period and even forthe three months of the second quarter. But I do have a concern thatwe not get ourselves in a position of letting money expand so rapidlythat it takes all the flexibility away from the second half of theyear and does not permit us, without some drastic moves, to get backwithin the bounds of the limits that we set for money growth at thelast meeting. I would note also that we have been fairly expansive inmoney growth over the last three or four months and if there's anylagged effect of money growth on real output, then I think weshouldn't get too exercised at the moment about easing policy. In-26-3/26/85view of my concern about not getting caught in the last half of theyear, then, I would be leaning to the side of snugging up just a bitthrough this second quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can go help the farmers byeating a doughnut or two![Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I detected a consensus on only one point:We're in a very difficult set of circumstances. I haven't heardanybody arguing for very bold moves in any direction. They may bejustified, but I don't detect that we're in the mood to act on that.Given that we're in a very narrow sector, I'm not sure that what we dohere is going to have major implications for the course of events inthe next few months. We'll see what happens. We didn't talk muchabout all the contingencies that could happen later in the year,mainly revolving around the dollar and the budget. Nobody knows. Ifthe dollar goes up much more, our dilemmas will be aggravated. If itcomes down sharply, we'll have a different set of dilemmas but maybe aclearer set. A very steep drop in the dollar would give us, I think,some sense of the outlook turning more favorable over time, thoughmaybe not immediately, but it also potentially could give us someinflationary problems. But I don't see what we can do to deal withthat now. I don't think there is much we can do either about all thisfragility in the short run [save] in some sense not aggravating it. Ido think we are getting a very rapid growth in debt but I'm not surewe can do much about that either. I think that reflects some of theunderlying imbalances in the economy. In the natural course of eventsit seems to me [appropriate] to remain somewhere around alternative B.We did have this fact that has been alluded to that borrowings haverun consistently above what we started out to maintain, anyway--Isuppose technically in part because excess reserves kept running abovewhat we had assumed they would run. If one were starting with anotion of "unchanged" one has to define what "unchanged" is--whetherit means borrowings or net borrowed reserves. Presumably we have beenusing borrowings recently. I must say that I think an overttightening step at this stage--given the uncertainties in the businesspicture, the height of the dollar, and the financial markets--couldturn out to rank as one of the more unfortunate bits of timing in ourhistory. That's about where I am.MR. RICE. I agree that this is not the time to tighten. Butit's also probably not the time to allow money growth to expandsubstantially above the band.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose those two doctrines areinconsistent?MR. PARTEE. By tightening do you mean interest rates?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't say that.MR. RICE. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose you could say by tightening thatyou mean reserve positions; that's what I mean.-27-3/26/85MR. RICE. I think the danger of allowing M1 to continue togrow at a rapid rate is that people eventually will conclude thatinterest rates are going to go up and we're going to have to tighten.And we don't want that either. So my own feeling is that the best wayto deal with our dilemma is "steady as you go." And, as you pointout, the problem is to define that.MR. PARTEE. Alternative B, if it works out, would cruise usright along this upper band for the time being. That seems to me nota bad outcome if we could get it. Fortunately, we have had this[slowing in] March; without March things really would be looking verygrim.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The latest very fragmentary numberssuggest that March might be just a touch higher than estimated. Idon't think enough--well, we just don't know what it is. It couldchange from week-to-week. It's not enough to make a significantdifference.MR. WALLICH. Well, "B" means that all year we're going to beabove the cone but we'll still be coming in approximately at the peak,at the [upper] end of the band. We have said that we might come in atthe higher end. We have absolutely no margin here and this is whatwould concern me. If we get a further overshoot, then we'll beconfronted with a need to do something two months from now that mightbe more drastic than what we would have to do now to slow it down. Onthe other hand, it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon the environment in whichwe're operating. We don't have to slow it down.MR. WALLICH. Yes. Well, it might well happen that we'retaken off the hook by some development and we might wait for that, inthat it is obvious that all the considerations relating to interestrates are adverse to any kind of tightening. Just name them: they areall negative except for the slowing of the money supply that I wouldlike to bring about. If we can rely on March perpetuating itself at areasonable rate, one can take that chance.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Nobody knows. Although I guess that isthe best econometric estimate--not quite perpetuating itself but thatit is consistent with "B."MR. AXILROD. That's right.MR. KEEHN. I'm a little unclear on the current borrowinglevel and where we really are; perhaps Steve and Peter could clarifyit. I have somewhat the feeling that we have been operating at ahigher level since the last meeting than perhaps the target and that,as a consequence, the current level would take us someplace between"B" and "C." If that's right, that might suggest that "B" in factwould represent a slight easing from where we are. Is that areasonable statement of the case?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The borrowings have been running higher,that's for sure.-28-3/26/85MR. STERNLIGHT. We have been aiming at $350 million ofborrowing but, as I said, for a couple of reasons--the main one beingthe greater demand for excess reserves--it has come out higher. Ithink particularly in that reserve period when borrowings averagedover $600 million there were some really special factors. Perhapsmore indicative is this current reserve period when it's averagingabout $470 million thus far. And even there I think it is probablybeing lifted some because of the greater demand for excess reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When we have borrowings this low--and wehad a couple of days when some big banks borrowed a large amount forwhat might kindly be called technical reasons--MR. STERNLIGHT. There were times like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They mismanaged their reserve positions.And when we're operating with borrowings in this range, a big lump isenough to affect the weekly average. One of them was $1.5 billion orsomething like that, I think, in one day. For a two-week periodthat's $100 million--and for a one-week period, $200 million--on theaverage. And it kind of comes out of the blue; the market wasn't allthat tight but they--MR. AXILROD. Another way to look at it, President Keehn, isthat implied free reserves, so to speak, with $600 million in excessand $350 million in borrowing, are $250 million. In the first two-week period those free reserves ended up at $230 million but with $800million of excess and $570 million of borrowing. In the second two-week period--the one that just ended, not the one we're in but theprevious one--free reserves ended up at $110 million with $641 millionof borrowing and $751 million of excess. When that period ended wethought the excess was $932 million. It has been revised down. So inthat sense, we've been right around the path but borrowings came inhigh early and tended to stay up there [because of] occasional days oflarge borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, it looks like alternative B with a hopeand a prayer--that we start out the period with reserve positionsabout where they are. But I think we have to keep an open mind as wego through the next several weeks about the case for some snugging upthere. There is a lot of wisdom to the point that you've made that wedon't want to use up all our flexibility for later in the year,although one just can't lay out very precise contingency plans interms of under what circumstances one might snug up or not. But Iwould start the period about where we are and keep an open mind--afairly symmetrical open mind about what might happen as developmentsunfold through April.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. In order to glorify the obvious, let me begin mystatement with a reminder that we set the upper limit on M1, in myopinion, low relative to our assumptions about velocity this year. Weattempted to give ourselves some running room by not reducing theupper limit of M2 and M3 so much. As you know, we came down from an 8percent upper limit on M1 to 7 percent. It seems to me that lies-29-3/26/85behind the projection that we will run along the top of the so-calledband with alternative B, which I support. Apparently, M1 isdecelerating. The Chairman has indicated that the first estimate maybe modified somewhat. I'm a little troubled that the results in thethree econometric models that I follow seem to agree right now, whichalways gives me pause. They seem to agree that M1 at least, and alsoM2, will be coming down in this quarter. Secondly, we have thepossible weakness in velocity, particularly in V1 that we discussed inFebruary. I don't know what the velocity was in the first quarter butit must have been a minus 3 percent or something like that--7.4percent compared with 10.3 percent. If we have flat or negativevelocity, then to run along the top of the band does not seem to me tobe that risky. Once again, I think these cones and bands are usefultools, of course, but I am very encouraged by the universal awarenesshere of the risks in the economy in so many of the real sectors and somany of the financial sectors and in the international and domesticsituation. [Unintelligible] some slight difference from a band, thetop of which was set in order to give a certain long-run signal, giventhe almost unprecedented risks matrix here, both real and financial.It seems to me, given the uncertainty with regard to velocity and thehigh probability of having a negative 1 percent or something of thatsort, that around 7 percent is not an untoward goal for M1. So, Isupport alternative B. I support the $350 million borrowing and areconsideration at the July meeting of the upper limit of the M1 band.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, let me try to make a case for somethingbetween "B" and "C" if I could. First, we did establish the rangesfor the aggregates just a few weeks ago. And in your testimony Ithink you made it clear with regard to M1 that, with some caveats, wewould be within the range but certainly within the upper part of therange. I think the earlier conversation around the table would havesuggested that there are some greater risks this time than perhaps atthe last meeting; nonetheless, nothing that I heard would cause aspecific downward reduction in our forecast. The risks may be on thedown side but they are not enough to suggest a downward revision inthe forecast itself.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The staff did revise the forecast downwarda little.MR. KEEHN. Well, I'm talking about in a really major sense.I have a feeling that maybe we are currently between "B" and "C" and Iwould be in favor of maintaining the position that we have now withperhaps a slightly higher degree of pressure. Therefore, I mightsuggest for M1 a growth rate of, say, 6 percent, and a borrowing levelof between $500 and $600 million, or in that area.MR. PARTEE. $500 to 600 million?MR. GRAMLEY. What sort of a funds rate does that likely giverise to?MR. STERNLIGHT. 9 percent or higher. Higher than[unintelligible], particularly if we continue to use something likethe current excess reserve number. Frankly, if the demand for excessreserves continues to run ahead of what we're using now, then I think-30-3/26/85the borrowing is going to tend to come out, say, $100 million or sohigher than what we plug in there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks like we're doing something wrong.Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman we have a conflict between M1and the economic data. It seems to me that the more sensible thingwould be to stay where we are until we see how this conflict isresolved. If we have a second quarter of strong M1 and relativelysluggish economic indicators, as we had for example in 1982, then Ithink we simply have to revise the target for M1. I think there is areal possibility we might have to do that. But in the meantime, Ithink alternative B is the most sensible course.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. As I mentioned earlier, I think a lot of theeconomic success that we've enjoyed in the last year and half or sostems in part from our having done very well in meeting our M1targets. In the last half of 1983 we came in about on target and wecame in pretty closely on target for 1984. If, after our nextmeeting, it becomes apparent to the markets that we have aimed for apoint such as "B" or "A," which both are well above this upper band,then I think that's going to lead people to assume that we've thrownin the towel on inflation. I'd be very disturbed by aiming at anypoint above that upper band. As Roger suggested--and Steve and othersmade the point--if we do get to that point, then we have to make apretty wrenching effort to get back to our targets and that involvesobvious risks. So, as Steve stated very well, I think a little movenow might go a long way; so I would come out preferring a pathsomething like "C." I could live with something a little higher thanthat as long it weren't above the upper band and I think Si'ssuggestion of a borrowing range of $500 to $600 million would be aboutright. But what is more important to me than anything else is thereactive mechanism. What are we going to do if we find that the moneysupply isn't doing what we think it will do? It may be that we canactually stay within that range with falling rates. We really don'tknow because when the market is that tight the money supply is prettyhard to predict. So I think it would be a good idea to use anasymmetric directive that would require us to react much more stronglyif we start showing too much [money] growth. I'd use "would" on theup side and "might" on the lower side, if it becomes weaker.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. I would generally favor the specifications of "B"with one modification that I will come to in a minute. I would favor"B" with a symmetric approach to the directive, with the intention ofnot doing anything overt to change reserve availability immediately.Nevertheless, the one modification I would suggest--and this might bein the nature of splitting hairs--is reducing the [March to June] M1target associated with alternative B to 6 percent. I think that mightdo a couple of things for us. One is that to the extent the long-runtargets that we agreed to at our last meeting are appropriate, itseems to me it makes the second half of the year a little easier.That's one reason for doing it. But more fundamentally and moreimportantly in my mind, given my view of the economic outlook, I think-31-3/26/85that kind of target is certainly appropriate and would be associatedwith what I consider to be at least an adequate, and maybe a betterthan adequate, economic performance for the balance of the year. Itseems to me that the practical implications of that modest reductionin the M1 target would be that we wouldn't have to do anythingimmediately in terms of reserve availability, as I said, but it wouldput us in a position where if money continued strong--as it has withthe exception of March for the past few months--we could at least bein a position of considering whether we want to do something about itor not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the case has beenpretty well made that we have all these uncertainties and that thereis really not a compelling case, if you consider alternatives A, B andC, to make any bold moves. Contrary to our usual admonition of "Don'tsit there, do something," I would recommend the opposite approach thismonth: "Don't do something, sit there." I'd vote for "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Because of the uncertainties that we'vetalked about in the economy and some of the strains on the financialindustry, I would be inclined to accept the monetary specifications ofalternative B. But if there were a bias, I would want to tilt alittle, just a bit, toward snugging. The way I would do that would benot to push the borrowing back down to the $350 million level but tohave it somewhere between $400 and $500 million. I think that mightgive us just a tad more pressure on reserves. Given the bias that Iprefer, I also think that we should not respond to slower growth ofmoney on the down side, so I would favor an asymmetrical directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I too would generally associatemyself with alternative B but, for the reasons Mr. Stern mentioned andone other, I would favor having the M1 target at 6 percent--6, 7, and8 percent [respectively for M1, M2, and M3]. In addition to thereasons that Gary stated, I think we have potentially a bit of apublic relations problem in that 6-1/2 percent--and this really issplitting hairs--puts the target for the quarter above the parallelline. Against the background in which you and others of us have beensaying that if there's a "change in policy" we would communicate it, Ithink that aiming at something that would be a hair above the parallelline at this point is susceptible to interpretation as a change inpolicy. So, I would like to see the 6 percent for the substantivereasons mentioned but also because it would just about kiss theparallel line.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I'm concerned, as many are, that over the longrun--that is, the next 5 years or so--we will have an inflationproblem that is probably going to get worse when the dollar begins tofall, so that less money growth is better than more. So, I wouldprefer to see the growth of M1 come in lower than 6-1/2 percent; but Iwouldn't want to do anything to force it to do that. I like Ed's-32-3/26/85prescription of prayer better than Si Keehn's of raising the borrowinglevel to $500 or $600 million. It may be that by midyear we willregret this. But I don't think one can assume that, simply becausemoney might be at the upper edge of the parallel line--maybe not evenin close enough contact for an intimate kiss--at that point. I thinkwe have to decide that later; we have to wait and see what economicconditions look like at that time. Six percent might make sense,cosmetically, for the M1 target for March to June. What I worryabout, however, is that if we get a speed-up of tax refunds, we mighthave an increase in money growth for that reason, which reallywouldn't make any significant difference to the course of economicactivity. What I'd like to do is to adopt a course of policy now thatkeeps us really where we are. I don't want to see the fed funds ratego up to 9 percent and I don't want to see it go back down to 8percent. I would like to see it hover in the range of 8-1/2 to 8-3/4percent, or even 8-5/8 percent, which is about where it has beenrecently. I have a hunch that maybe we need a little higher level ofinitial borrowing than $350 million--maybe $400 million or somewherearound there. But the sense of my prescription would be to staypretty steady at this time.MR. MORRIS. Do you think the Committee ought to hire achaplain?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I guess I would like to begin with a question.Is the borrowing target really a target or isn't it? I sit here and Ihear these numbers; yet at the next FOMC meeting I see what we come inwith--MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it is the number that's used inconstructing the path for nonborrowed reserves, and the nonborrowedreserves are a target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that isn't exactly my understanding.I think we tried to explain that in a memo a couple of meetings ago.MR. AXILROD. It's very hard to control the distribution ofreserves--other than nonborrowed--between borrowing and excess. It'svery hard to control the distribution of free reserves. The marketwill tend to do that. Now, one can observe it as it comes; but if themarket has the slightest idea that funds might track up for one reasonor another [unintelligible] the borrowing will tend to come in earlyin a two-week period. And if it's high enough early enough, it's hardever to get it down to target and that will manifest itself eventuallyin the excess reserves. Some of it we will take out in hitting ournonborrowed target but we won't take out all of it. So, to a greatextent we're at the mercy of the market in that distribution. And Iwould think that the funds rate recently probably has been a bithigher than either Peter or I would have expected early in the period.MS. SEGER. It's higher than I thought I understood at thelast meeting.MR. AXILROD. But it's not that much higher, I think, than ifyou had $350 million of borrowing and the same free reserves. If youhad $500 million of borrowing and the same free reserves, it may be a-33-3/26/85little higher--perhaps an eighth of a point, I would guess--but itisn't very far off.MS. SEGER. At some point, though, do we at this Committeemeeting have to take into account these changing attitudes towardexcess reserves?MR. AXILROD. That's something Mr. Sternlight can gauge inthe course of the two-week period. All he can do is see what'shappening to excess reserves and try to gauge a sense of the demandsusing whatever information we have, including how the funds rate ismoving and what we think is governing the distribution of reserves.MS. SEGER. Well, okay.MR. STERNLIGHT. We have been doing that recently. We havebeen making an allowance in this current reserve period; even though$600 million is in there for excess reserves, we've been thinking ofit as somewhat higher and not rushing in to take out what has lookedover the last couple of days, for example, like more than enoughreserves for the path.MS. SEGER. It still seems that we're getting more of aninterest rate impact than we expect or plan for at these meetings.MR. STERNLIGHT. Slightly more.MR. AXILROD. Well, Governor Seger, let me make just one morepoint on that. As I think was explained in the Bluebook, when moneywas running high, the borrowing assumption was thought to be in the$350 to $400 million range, so there was the merest little tilt inthat sense. It probably got a little tighter--a shade marked up--[but] that has been reversed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We ended up with more borrowings than weintended, more excess reserves than were assumed, and we had somewhathigher interest rates than one might have guessed. But the Committeeisn't operating on an interest rate target. If we wanted to operateon an interest rate target, we would; that's a decision the Committeecould make.MS. SEGER. I understand that we're not operating on aninterest rate target. But when we're trying to look at the variousalternatives, one of the things I look at is what the expectedinterest rate impact will be given one choice versus another. Andthat's all I'm saying.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a certain temptation--MR. PARTEE. Sometimes they're wrong.MS. SEGER. In terms of the alternatives, if I had to chooseamong them, I'd take alternative B but with a tilt toward "A" ratherthan a tilt toward "C" because of my concerns about the impact of anyadditional increase in short-term interest rates on the financialsystem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Garbarini.-34-3/26/85MR. GARBARINI. Well, Mr. Chairman, I expect to pray to theLord to get His attention then have Him judge me on my actions. Thereis a lot of uncertainty. I would agree with much of what has beensaid by Jerry and Si. Although one might say that they differ, Ithink they differ only in the degree of the way to go about this.Since my bias is toward continuing to make sure that we don't overexpand, I would be tempted to lean toward "C." But given theuncertainties and other considerations, I would say something inbetween "B" and "C" with--sharing Si's feeling--perhaps a slightlylarger borrowing target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I rather like what Lyle said. I think,cosmetically, it would be desirable to put in a 6 percent M1 and wecan review later whether or not we want to change the upper limit.But for now, I think the notion that growth would be running prettyparallel with that upward path line is a pretty good one. I thinkmaybe the borrowings number could be snugged to $400 million, which isvery little change. In fact, it may be a little easing from where weactually have been. But I wouldn't go as far as Si has suggested.I'm wondering if there are times--and I think there are--when it isdesirable to pay more attention to the markets and less to theaggregates. And since I agree that it could be pretty destructive tohave a sizable, significant, appreciable rise in the funds rate atthis point, I wonder whether we shouldn't reduce [the top of] thatrange to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the funds rate range?MR. PARTEE. Yes. Maybe we ought to lower the rate toindicate some symmetry on this; perhaps we ought to raise the 6percent [lower limit], but I think not. In any event, I think thereought to be an understanding that if following the course we'refollowing is likely to take the funds rate above 9 percent, wecertainly ought to talk about it. And perhaps we ought to signal thatto the market by putting that in the directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I would favor alternative B with a modificationto 6 percent [on M1 growth], making it 6, 7, and 8 percent, withborrowing of around $400 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else do we have here?MR. RICE. Do you have me, Mr. Chairman?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.MR. RICE. I would favor the specifications of alternative Bas presented, with $350 million on borrowing, because I think they aremost likely to keep us where we are and are most likely to result inan 8-1/2 percent funds rate. I can live with any kind of refinementor fine tuning that would increase the chances of our staying ataround an 8-1/2 percent funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.-35-3/26/85MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would join those whowould opt for a 6 percent target for M1--in other words, just a modestmodification of alternative B for the reasons described by JerryCorrigan and others. Clearly, that would imply maintaining theexisting conditions, whatever that may mean. Therefore, in my mind itcomes down to what borrowing level should be adopted. I would jointhose who would adopt a level in the $400 to $500 million range,tending toward $450 million I suppose, because based upon pastexperience it seems to me that we're talking about someplace around8-1/2 to 8-5/8 percent as existing conditions with respect to interestrates. What gets us there is not clear, but it seems to me it wouldbe something more than $350 or $400 million--something more in the$400 to $500 million range.I would just note that in the Bluebook there is a recognitionof the seasonal borrowing and that the Desk would intend toaccommodate the seasonal borrowing starting with a level of about $80million in the current time period and increasing upward. Lookingover the last three years, the second-quarter average for seasonalborrowing is something around $200 million, based upon the oldseasonal borrowing privilege. Taking into consideration that we notonly have a new temporary seasonal provision but we have expanded theregular seasonal provision to encompass a great many other banks, Ihope the Desk will be mindful that that could explode on us, if indeedthere are creditworthy borrowers out there to whom banks can passthrough seasonal credit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you getting any demand for that?MR. GUFFEY. No, as a matter of fact the demand that--.Well, first of all, are you talking about the temporary?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, either one.MR. GUFFEY. The seasonal borrowing is at a very low level atthe present time. I think the numbers are presently about $80 millionnationwide, whereas in past years by this time we would have been upin the $150 million or so range and then would accelerate on up fromthat point. And we haven't seen that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's lower than normal.MR. GUFFEY. It is lower than normal.MR. AXILROD. Well, in 1984 and 1982 the spread of the fundsrate over the discount rate was much higher than it is now. And in1983 it was considerably less. So, the tendency of seasonal borrowingis to rise, obviously, from February to March but the level aroundwhich it fluctuates is affected by that spread.MR. PARTEE. You haven't had any inquiries for seasonal?MR. GUFFEY. No, as a matter of fact, it's interesting: Ithink they're sitting on their hands. The other aspect of this isthat of the $650 million government provision--that is, the guaranteedloan program--only $8-1/2 million has been used. Nobody knows what todo, I think.-36-3/26/85MR. KEEHN. Chuck, we have had a lot of inquiries; there is atremendous amount of interest. I think people have reaffirmed thatthe problem was not liquidity but rather asset quality. Nonetheless,there have been a lot of inquiries and a general appreciation that,having faced the problem, we've developed a solution to try and dealwith it. But no takers--MR. PARTEE. No takers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, two left [to speak]. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. I would favor a borrowing level of about $500million; that would put me in the "B minus" range. And I think theadjustment from 6-1/2 to 6 percent on M1 would be appropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, at the margin. I could live with "B" asis. I would prefer it to be tightened a little to borrowing of $450million and would accept a very mild increase in the funds rate and anM1 [target] at 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a great desire for "B" ifpeople know what "B" means. Just in terms of the numerology a numberof people have said 6 percent [for M1 growth], and I would declare avictory for 6 percent on the simple basis that it's a round number.MR. PARTEE. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a wonderful 6, 7, and 8 percent, andit will have no discernible effect on what we do! Now, whether theborrowings will have a discernible effect on what we do, we have somedifferences of opinion. My own bias would be on the lower side ofthat. In all this hypothesizing about what we might do, it's easy ifmoney runs low; if it runs high, I'd want to know if it was runninghigh after three consecutive months of decline in industrialproduction and the dollar 3 percent higher than it is now or whetherit was running high with industrial production rising and the dollarfalling. Then I would have a quite different attitude. I don't knowhow you forecast that at this point. And that's my problem. I have asneaking suspicion that one of those is more likely than the other,which biases my attitude toward this a bit. The low end of thepreferences on borrowing is roughly the $350 to $400 million range;then there are those who said a $500 million range and those who said$500 million or more.MS. SEGER. I wanted $350 million; I don't think I said it.MR. RICE. Is borrowing at $500 to $600 million consistentwith a 6 percent growth in Ml?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who knows? According to the analysis,$350 million is consistent with--MR. RICE. Well, that's my point. I would think that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $350 million is the midpoint of the rangeof our experts' [views] after examining all the entrails.-37-3/26/85MR. PARTEE. Well, $500 to $600 million is going to put thefunds rate under upward pressure isn't it? We didn't get an answer.MR. RICE. That's what it says here.MR. AXILROD. It's hard to answer, but I would say that wewould use whatever borrowing assumption the Committee arrives at toconstruct the path and we will make an excess reserves assumption.Let's say it's a little higher than $600 million--suppose it were $650million. We will use that excess reserves assumption no matter whatlevel of borrowing the Committee arrives at. So, if the Committeearrives at a level of borrowing at $500 million and we're assumingexcess reserves of $650 million, in my mind, that would be a tighterreserve position than we have had over the previous period, comparingsay, $350 to $400 million and $650 million. And that probably wouldlead to a funds rate somewhere above 8-1/2 percent, maybe 8-3/4percent rather than one possibly below 8-1/2 percent or maybe 8-3/8 to8-1/2 percent, which is my rough guess in relation to alternative B.Mr. Sternlight may have a somewhat different view.MR. STERNLIGHT. No, I think that would be--MR. PARTEE. Well, maybe what we ought to do is have anagreement as to net borrowings rather than borrowings.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not so sure about that. No, Ithink that would be a mistake, because we might get more demand forexcess reserves. If we set a net borrowing target, that's puttingmore pressure on the market; I think that's in effect what happenedlast time. And I think we would not be getting the results that wewanted. What we do is make some judgments ex post, as a result ofthis meeting, that we have made an excess reserve assumption that istoo low, though too low is a kind of qualified [assessment]. Wedidn't mind that so much when M1 was rising rapidly. If the businessnews isn't too weak or isn't doing anything extraordinary, we lean onthat side or tolerate that side. If we're not so tolerant of that, wewill be a little more aggressive in making sure that borrowings don'tget too much above where we're talking about. It's very hard to judgethat mechanically, because it depends upon what the market is thinking--how high the market shoves the federal funds rate. Therefore, wecan get some surprisingly high borrowing in the beginning of theperiod, and there's not much we can do about it, once it is borrowed,without really putting out the money later in the week.MR. MARTIN. Especially when we don't seem to understand whyit is that there's this demand, particularly in the smallerinstitutions, for excess reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What you can do, if that's the judgment--you can't provide any insurance but if you want to lean againstgetting those kinds of borrowing figures--is put the money in a littleearlier than you otherwise would put it in.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, the market also runs ahead ofitself. If you look at this whole period since the last Committeemeeting, some of the increase in the funds rate, and I think some ofthe marginal pressure on the borrowings, just reflected the change inmarket psychology that took place early on in the period. There's no-38-3/26/85way in the world that you can try and wash that out. The market seemsto do a pretty good job these days of getting ahead of this thing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From my standpoint, a not unreasonableapproach would be to say that we're aiming at something like $350 to$400 million. That doesn't guarantee that in particular weeks or two-week periods it wouldn't be above that in particular circumstances;but we aim in that area with a little more caution or aggressiveness--depending upon which side you look at it--than we did last interval.That is lower than some people preferred, but there was a substantialbody of opinion in that area. I think this would be consistent withthe funds rate not going above 9 percent, but I don't know. Nobodyknows. I've asked people what they want. We have a suggestion fromGovernor Partee to narrow that [funds rate] band. Does that attractsupport?MR. WALLICH. I think if we lower that, that would signal tothe market that we've shifted to a different kind of approach. Inprinciple, I would like an early consultation; I think that makes alot of sense--but not if we tell them we have narrowed the band and weare focused more on the funds rate.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, I could associate with thatview. I think there may well be a case here for some bias in thedirection of early consultation. But I would not want to see theformal band in the directive changed.MR. MARTIN. I think it will be interpreted as: "There theygo, targeting interest rates." I would join my two colleagues, orthree colleagues, in opposing that.MR. PARTEE. There has been a lot of talk about targetinginterest rates as we've gone around the table.MR. RICE. No. Speakers mentioned interest rates but nobodyhas been talking targeting; they are talking about what they wouldlike to see.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Want to argue further Governor Partee?MR. PARTEE. No. I think it's out of character for me toeven propose it!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's assume that the funds rateband stays. But the message is that if the rate got above 9 percent,some people might be concerned enough to want to have a discussion ofthat. I think that message is clear. There aren't any othervariables. The question is this borrowing number, if the 6, 7, 8percent formulation is generally acceptable. Should I propose $350 to$400 million?MR. MARTIN. Yes sir.MR. GUFFEY. If we're successful in hitting $350 to $400million, that will be the first time the market would have seen thatnumber for about three or four weeks. I don't know what the reactionwould be, but it could be one of ease, if we did it more than oneweek.-39-3/26/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we might be into very [sensitive]--MR. RICE. The market might like that.MR. GRAMLEY. If I thought that were going to happen, I wouldshare Roger's concern. I would rather have the market say: "There hasbeen no change in policy and the Fed is even-keeling now; it hasn'tpanicked because of those high growth numbers for money early in theyear; on the other hand, it is not prepared to lower interest ratesbecause it appears that the economy is going into recession." So, ifRoger is right, I'd rather see $450 million. I'm not sure.MR. PARTEE. Well, the market looks at excess reserves too.And if the borrowing fluctuates some while excess fluctuates too, itseems to me they can put it together.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever number we put down here, I thinkone can be pretty sure that if excess reserves really jumped in someweek, the way it would work out is that the borrowings probably wouldjump too. But we would be more cautious of them, probably, than wehave been. There's a little peculiarity in the record: The last timewe said [in the directive] that we didn't change, and we didn't havemuch change. If you just looked at borrowings, it looks like wetightened up. If we say we're [not] going to change this time andthey go down, it looks like the opposite.MR. AXILROD. Borrowings thus far this week, the week thatwe're going to publish--the week, not the two weeks--in the mostrecent Fed statements is running very close to $400 million, forwhatever [that's worth].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Taking account of all the noise,particularly that one two-week period where we had that $1-1/2 billionborrowing [by one] institution, I don't think the markets would sensethat we're very far away from $400 million right now would they,Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. They probably would guess that we had aimedat something like $400 to $500 million, because I think they dismissedthat $600 million plus that we had in one two-week period. Theyprobably would be thinking $400 to $500 million.MR. BLACK. Well, shouldn't we then consider using thatfigure?MR. RICE. $350 million. That's what we [unintelligible]because we might get something on average a lot higher, just like now.$350 million.MR. GRAMLEY. I think if we start with borrowing of $350 to$500 million, that ought to provide a lot of flexibility on exactlyhow that's interpreted, depending on demand for excess reserves and soon. And that's certainly not too wide a range of borrowing to beunreasonable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you say--$350 to $500 million?MR. GRAMLEY. $350 to $500 million.-40-3/26/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I said $400 million.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, I know. But I'm responding to Bob Black'ssuggestion that maybe we ought to start with $400 to $500 millioninstead of $350 to $400 million because that's really where we are nowaccording to Peter Sternlight. So, I say let's be very reasonable:let's start with $350 to $500 million as a working range; that'spresumably one we all might be able to live with.MR. KEEHN. I would think the $350 to $500 million would be agood compromise for the difference.MR. GUFFEY. I assume the path then would be built upon a$425 million level.MR. AXILROD. Well, Governor Gramley, that is where we are interms of borrowing; it's not where we are now in terms of implied freereserves. I'm not arguing for a free reserves target. All I'm sayingis that it is a shade tighter than we've been aiming to be, because onfree reserves in the same way, it will be a shade tighter.MR. MARTIN. And 6-1/2 percent to 6 percent [on the M1objective] is a shade tighter.MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes.MR. MARTIN. Okay, now we have two shades.MR. PARTEE. I prefer $350 to $400 million, with someflexibility in--MR. RICE. I support that too.MR. MARTIN. I would too.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I can associate with that too.MR. KEEHN. Isn't $350 to $400 million a very narrow range?Really?MR. GRAMLEY. It means we're going to start at $375 million.MR. PARTEE. Well, we ordinarily use a single point.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We usually have one single point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, sometimes we have one number andsometimes we have a range. In any case, it's implied as we play thisout during the period, depending upon how money and other numbers run,that we take the risks of it being higher or lower. Well, I don'tknow where we are on this. We have a fair number of people around$350 to $400 million; we have a fair number who have something like--I'm checking off numbers here. Mr. Balles and Mr. Forrestal have notexpressed themselves recently.MR. FORRESTAL. I said $400 to $500 million, I thought.-41-3/26/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know; I thought maybe you'd become moreflexible.MR. FORRESTAL. I'm not much concerned about the differencebetween $350 and $400 million. I am more flexible in that respect.MR. BALLES. I supported "B" as stated, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's $350 million.MR. PARTEE. Average the two of them.MR. MARTIN. The great compromiser!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And Mr. Rice is there too.MR. RICE. $350 million.MR. PARTEE. Martha was there too.MS. SEGER. Right.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I ask Steve to elaborate alittle more on what he thinks the federal funds implication of thatmight be?MR. AXILROD. Of what?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that case, we're not worried about thefederal funds rate.MR. BLACK. Yes, but--MR. STERNLIGHT. If we really were to achieve $350 million, Ithink the implication for the funds rate would be something a littleunder 8-1/2 percent, maybe 8-1/4 percent. It really depends partly onwhat we put in for excess reserves too, Mr. Black. I think if we wereto stay with $600 million, which has been proving to be on the lowside, then using $600 million for excess and $350 for borrowing isreally like imposing a somewhat higher level of borrowing--the $350million would be more like getting $450 million. And with that, Ithink you'd get maybe 8-1/2 percent on fed funds. My own feeling isthat if you're going to have some flexibility on the borrowing, youhave to have some on the excess too, which we have to a degree.MR. RICE. We should know whether we can get fed funds ratesrunning for a few days at 8-3/4 percent while remaining at $350million.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [Unintelligible] percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we ought to talk about the wording,which I suppose is related. Most people are reasonably satisfied with$350 to $400 million. I think it reduces itself to a simple question:Does it help in terms of happy harmony, in people's best opinions, tomake it $350 to $450 million?MR. GUFFEY. [Unintelligible.]-42-3/26/85MR. KEEHN. Yes.MR. BLACK. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What about those on the other side?MR. MARTIN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, why don't we say $350 to $450million? [Whether we] remain within that range in one particular weekor two-week period will be gauged in part on how the money supply andother things [behave]--money supply and the exchange rate being themost obvious short-term indicators. All right, it's 6, 7, and 8percent, $350 to $450 million, depending upon money growth and theexchange rate.MR. GRAMLEY. And the economy also.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the economy too; but it's not likelyto change enough to remake the economy.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, what about the "woulds" and"mights"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll get to the wording now. This [draft]has so many words crossed out and put in that I find it a littledifficult to read. The first sentence is fairly straightforward: "Inthe implementation of policy for the immediate future, taking accountof the progress against inflation, uncertainties in the businessoutlook, and the exchange value of the dollar, the Committee seeks tomaintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions." Thenit goes on: "This action is expected to be consistent with growth inM1, M2, and M3 at annual rates of around 6, 7, and 8 percentrespectively during the period from March to June." Now we have the"woulds" and "mights" in this next sentence. Before I get to that, inthat next sentence, which begins "In either case, such a change," I'mnot sure I like all those things here, but I think we ought to mentionall of them somehow. We have a 6 to 10 percent funds range with theunderstanding of Mr. Partee's concern. I might say, based upon what Iknow now, that I'm a little more reluctant to tighten than to ease. Ican imagine conditions in which one might want to tighten; I can moreeasily imagine conditions in which one would want to ease.MR. PARTEE. It seems to me that we ought to be symmetric,Paul, and that we ought to use the word "might" in both cases insteadof "would."MS. SEGER. And put the ease first.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess at least we could do that--putease first and use "might" in both sentences. That's not too bad.MR. GRAMLEY. On page 13, this sentence that begins: "Ineither case, such a change would be considered only in the context"why do we want the word "only"? We should just flat put it that wewould consider this in the context of some larger considerations.-43-3/26/85CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we put "might" in both cases, that'seven more clear.MR. PARTEE. I think that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll do that, if that's acceptable, andreverse the sequence. We use "might" in both cases and take out theword "only." Is that all understood?MR. PARTEE. And the funds rate 6 to 10 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fundsand it's 6, 7, and 8 percent [for theis except we reverse the order of theand take out "only." All the rest israte range isaggregates].sentence, usethe same.6 to 10 percentIt all reads as itthe word "might"MR. AXILROD. That's right. You have left in the phrase inbrackets that's in the first sentence?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.that anybody else has an opinion.I think it'sOkay.useful. I don't knowMR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we're finished.END OF MEETING-44-