Passage number 1.
  Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on June 21–22, 2011  June 21 Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Because this is a joint FOMC–Board meeting, I need a motion to close the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the procedural requirement for closing the meeting.


Passage number 2.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "So moved" is a response or agreement to a statement or proposal.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  We are starting very early, and I thank you for arranging your schedules that way.  We have an awful lot to accomplish today, and I would certainly like to get to the end of the economic go-round.  So let me just ask everyone, where possible, to be succinct and to be aware of the time. That being said, I would first like to take a minute to note that, with high probability, this will be the last meeting for Dave Stockton before he ambles off into the sunset.  [Laughter]  Dave joined the Federal Reserve in 1981 as the inflation specialist in the section that was known as Wages, Prices, and Productivity.  That year, the CPI clocked in at about 10 percent.  [Laughter]  However, after ’81, of course, it began to come down very steadily.  After successfully bringing inflation under control, Dave rose rapidly through the ranks and was appointed division director in 2000.  In all, he has attended 170 FOMC meetings, including 84 as division director and FOMC economist.  At his first meeting back in November ’85, he delivered a lengthy presentation to Chairman Volcker and the rest of the Committee on the effect of dollar depreciation on the U.S. economy.  They must have liked it, because they invited him back almost immediately.  As far as the macroeconomics is concerned, perhaps it will suffice for today simply to note that Dave’s time as director included both the last years of the Great Moderation and the period that I am confident will become known as the Great Immoderation.  [Laughter]  Economic historians will puzzle for years over Dave’s role in all of that.  [Laughter]  Dave has given us the benefit of his keen insight as a macroeconomist, his unparalleled grasp of the inflation mechanism in the United States, and the hallmark of his time here, the wit and humility in which he has wrapped it all.  Never before has the owner of the staff forecast compared its shelf life unfavorably to that of a jar of mayonnaise in the Mojave Desert.  [Laughter]  So, Dave, on behalf of the Board and the Committee, we want to thank you for a job exceedingly well done.  Thank you.  [Applause] Our first item today is our special topic on DSGE models, and I will call in just a moment on Michael Dotsey from the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank.  He will be supported by Marco Del Negro from New York, Jeff Campbell from Chicago, and J. P. Laforte from the Board.  I really appreciated the summary memo and the background papers that we got; a lot of care went into trying to make this intelligible and understandable to everybody.  And it was a great example of the collaborative effort between Board researchers and Reserve Bank researchers.  So let me turn to Michael.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing appreciation and thanking someone for their service.


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much, again, for the collaborative work that you have done.  I think it is very encouraging that staff is trying to introduce new research developments, at the same time maintaining an eclectic and broad-based approach to forecasting and analysis.  A particular advantage of these models, as you point out, is that they give you an opportunity to create stories that are economically well-grounded.  They also let you look at policy analysis in a way that will take into account the potential behavioral responses to changes in policy regimes.  Those things are very useful, and I commend the staff for doing this work.  I think it is an important part of our collective progress in analyzing the economy. Let me kick off the Q&A round and ask whether the concept of a utilization rate ever appears in these models.  For example, in housing, we would think that the notion of vacancies affects the marginal product of constructing a new house.  In both capital and labor, you would think that utilization would be relevant.  Because that requires departing from a truly neoclassical kind of production function and allowing for perhaps some fixed coefficients, it may not be feasible, but I am just curious if thought has been given to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily expresses appreciation for collaborative work and acknowledges the value of the staff's efforts in introducing new research developments. The speaker also asks a question about the inclusion of a certain concept in the models, but this does not indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 5.
 MR. DOTSEY.  I agree with you on these things.  Right now, the models that we have mix extensive and intensive margins, and we really don’t talk about things like unemployment.  It is true that deviations of where the model is from a steady state are very important, and those are gap-like concepts, but not exactly what you may be asking about.  A lot of those types of things, though, are on the DSGE framework.  I think that many of the things you suggest are doable; they just haven’t been done yet.  They involve a lot of work, and researchers have to figure out which ones they want to attack and in what order.  As I mentioned in my briefing, developing more realistic labor market sectors, where we can actually look at unemployment measures in more detail, are certainly front and center.  None of our models incorporates that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the ideas being discussed and stating that the suggested changes are doable but have not been implemented yet.


Passage number 6.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  Any other questions.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements are simple and do not convey any conflicting or contrasting ideas.


Passage number 7.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  I have two sets of questions.  One, how have the models done in terms of forecasting.  You show the current forecast, but if you back things up six months or a year ago, or two years ago, how have they actually done.  And when a model does poorly, how do you assess that.  Is that because there were shocks or because the model was misspecified.  How do you interpret what is a good model versus what is a bad model. My second set of questions is going to maybe go in the same direction as the Chairman was going.  How do you think about balance sheet constraints in the context of these models. For example, right now you have changes in credit standards and credit availability.  Do the models just take those and translate them into a particular shock.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking questions and seeking clarification, but there is no clear contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 8.
 MR. DOTSEY.  Okay.  With regard to forecasting, there has been only a little bit of work done with these particular models formally testing how well they forecast.  In particular, the EDO model has done some exercises, I believe, over the 1997 to 2004 period, and I think the answer is that it does about as well as FRB/US. Some other work that I have read by somebody at the ECB has looked at three or four different DSGE models—the Smets-Wouters model, something very close to EDO—and has looked at model averaging.  In those particular exercises, when you start looking three and four and five quarters out, the DSGE approach seems to outforecast what was in the Greenbook when it comes to output growth, does slightly less well on inflation, and actually, surprisingly, does a little bit better at predicting the Committee’s own behavior three, four, and five quarters out.  These are not our models, and certainly, if you were to use the forecasts from our models, I agree that one of the things that we need to be able to bring to your attention is how well their forecasts have done over a period of time in comparison with others. In terms of trying to think about misspecification—and I’m going to let some of my colleagues pipe in, if they want to, because they are the actual experts on model development.  When you start seeing really, really huge shocks that have to drive everything and the shocks take on a very persistent type of character, then you can be somewhat skeptical of the model.  That is a signal that something outside the model that is driving things.  Then you may have to say, “Well, maybe in this particular case, because it is just large persistent shocks and is not something endogenous to the model, we are not looking at your DSGE model today.” In terms of credit standards, I believe in the New York model—I’m going to let Marco answer this in a minute—those types of things reflect, for example, how much net worth people have and how risky the borrowers are, and that will influence credit spreads endogenously.  In the EDO model, the risk premium is, as you say, exogenous.  But there are models on the shelf that do look at these net worth characteristics and how they do affect credit spreads, and I believe that those could be incorporated into the framework as we go forward.  I would like to turn to Marco, who has done more work on this, if that’s okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It provides information on different models and their forecasting abilities. There is no argument or conflict presented in the passage.


Passage number 9.
 MR. DEL NEGRO.  Let me address one thing about the misspecification.  Of course, big forecast errors translate into shocks in this model.  That has to be the case.  However, because these models are estimated, the econometrician learns, and the model learns, from past mistakes.  The model hates having big forecast errors.  [Laughter]  And, therefore, parameter estimates adjust.  That happens, for instance, for the incorporation of financial frictions with data coming from the crisis. Getting back to your question about the balance sheet, the New York model has, in a very coarse way, an idea of leverage.  Leverage is fundamental to explain the financial frictions in the model.  So, at a very high level, we can talk about leverage—of course, probably not to the very specific extent that you want us to talk about it, but there is model development in terms of having a finer banking system.  We hope that in the future we will be better able to address your questions.  The other models also address, to some extent, these other shocks, like marginal efficiency and investment shocks, that capture financial frictions.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is explaining the process of how forecast errors are learned from and adjusted in the model, and also discusses the incorporation of financial frictions and the development of a finer banking system in the future. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 10.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Let me piggyback with a comment related to forecasting with EDO.  As Mike said, the published paper on the forecasting ability of EDO only went through 2004.  But, actually, J. P. Laforte, Rochelle Edge, and Mike Kiley looked at it through a more recent period in a sort of pseudo real-time forecasting exercise using the actual data published at the time.  And we have also had the actual real-time forecasting experience of EDO.  I think it really shows what Mike said, in the sense that EDO does about as well as a lot of techniques.  As Mike Kiley would immediately say, “That’s not a fantastic standard to hold it to,” [laughter] but it does as well.  So these models are useful for forecasting.  In terms of what has been happening over the last year or so, I’d say the way EDO has been surprised is in many respects the same as the way FRB/US and the staff forecast in general have been surprised—that is, this recovery has turned out to be slower and more prolonged—and we’re having to reassess what is going on as the weakness persists.  And that relates to the point Marco made:  The model errors raise the question of what exactly is going on out here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It discusses the forecasting ability of EDO and acknowledges that it has performed similarly to other techniques. It also mentions that the recovery has been slower and more prolonged than expected, leading to a reassessment of what is happening. However, there is no disagreement or contention expressed in the passage.


Passage number 11.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This question cannot be answered without the specific passage being provided. Please provide the passage in question.


Passage number 12.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 13.
 WILLIAMS.  To start, I would like to thank Mike and all of the System staff who worked on this project, which has been going on for quite some time.  I think this work illustrates some of the valuable synergies between policy analysis and academic research.  I especially applaud the approach of comparing and contrasting alternative models, which illustrates the tough modeling choices and tradeoffs that all researchers face when developing models for policy analysis, and I think, more importantly, provides different perspectives on the economy and policy. I have two questions for Mike.  First, what do you see to be the key advantages or insights of the DSGE models over, say, FRB/US in thinking about the current situation and the appropriate stance of policy today.  And my closely-related second question is, what do these models tell us about the impact of the events of the past three years on potential output—or, in the parlance of DSGE models, the natural rate of output—and the output gap. One purported advantage of DSGE models is they provide a theoretical basis for distinguishing between shocks to supply and demand.  Indeed, in many DSGE models, supply shocks—that’s shocks to preferences and technology—account for a significant share of economic fluctuations.  This distinction between supply and demand shocks is a critical issue for monetary policy because policy should respond differently, depending on the nature of the shock.  I am particularly curious about the New York Fed’s model, which shows very persistent effects of the financial crisis on output.  In the New York Fed model, does this primarily reflect a decline in potential output or a very persistent output gap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mostly expressing appreciation for the work of the System staff and discussing the advantages of different models for policy analysis. There are some questions posed, but they are not presenting any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 14.
 MR. DOTSEY.  I am not an expert on FRB/US, so I don’t think I can really say exactly what the weaknesses are of FRB/US versus the DSGE framework.  What I can say is what you alluded to—that the DSGE framework, because of its manageable size and the restrictions associated with forward-looking and optimizing behavior, allows us to, as you said, characterize the shocks.  We can look at impulse-response functions that we know are related to a fundamental type of shock, rather than something that may be just a reduced-form forecast error, and see how that plays through the economy, giving people an idea of how the model works. In regard to gaps, there are numerous ways to construct gaps.  The models themselves don’t find most of those constructions as a first-order part of the model.  So basically, the gaps that most of us can tell you about are where we are relative to the steady-state growth of the economy.  And most of these models were a long way away, between 4 and 10 percent.  Regarding the New York Fed model, I’ll let Marco field the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of the speaker providing their perspective and knowledge on the topic without challenging or contradicting any previous statements or opinions.


Passage number 15.
 MR. DEL NEGRO.  I want to clarify a little bit of what Mike said.  Gaps, I think, are an important part of these models.  In fact, getting back to your questions, the headwinds—a slower recovery from the financial crisis—is largely a gap story; it’s not a trend in output now being lower.  It’s a gap caused by shocks that have a very prolonged effect on output, depress economic activity, and therefore keep inflation low.  Now, maybe what Mike was referring to, and you as well, is that there are various ways of measuring gaps.  One is related to the trend in output, and another is relative to a hypothetical universe without nominal rigidities.  Well, the second way is actually very challenging, as shown in a recent paper by Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti, because it involves a number of conceptual and measurement issues.  We don’t yet have measures of this alternative gap, but it plays a role in the model, and we can certainly provide them to you in due time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing clarification and discussing different ways of measuring gaps in economic models.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 17.
 MS. YELLEN.  I want to thank you very much for an excellent presentation, and to applaud the staff’s work in the collaboration that you have going here on DSGE models.  I think it’s extremely valuable, and I agree with you that these models can play a very useful role in medium-term forecasts.  I hope that the Committee will be able to routinely look at forecasts generated by the suite of models you’ve described, along with FRB/US and SIGMA and other models that we have here at the Board. I just want to make one suggestion about something that I would find useful.  I’ve long been a fan of using simple rules as benchmarks for monetary policy.  And I think macroeconomic models can play a key role in formulating and comparing these rules.  President Williams has written important papers showing that, in gauging the performance of simple rules, it is important to use a range of alternative models to help identify rules that would be robust to uncertainty, particularly uncertainty about the structure of the economy, as well as shocks.  So I want to suggest and encourage staff to potentially conduct an analysis of simple monetary policy rules using the DSGE models that you have presented to us today, and we could do the same thing using other models at the Board—FRB/US and SIGMA, which is an open economy DSGE model that’s been developed here.  I know we’ve talked about possibly having a future discussion of monetary policy rules, and I think this would be a potentially useful part of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and making a suggestion for further analysis using different models.


Passage number 18.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Governor Yellen, we’ve talked a little bit about this, and Philadelphia made a suggestion a while ago to staff that one of our two-day meetings in the future might be about such robust policy rules and variations.  Using these models as input into that exercise might be a way to push these things along together, so I would encourage that.  That’s a great idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses agreement and support for a suggestion made by Philadelphia to discuss robust policy rules and variations during a two-day meeting.


Passage number 19.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The statement "President Kocherlakota" simply mentions a person without any context or indication of any disagreement or contention associated with them.


Passage number 20.
   MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just had one quick question for Mike, which is, how do the models capture the large-scale asset purchases and their impact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 21.
 MR. DOTSEY.  First, we don’t have a rich term structure or any type of market segmentation in the asset market.  So with regard to QE2, that’s not going to be done directly.  But there are other studies that we can piggyback on that indicate how much so many hundred billions of dollars of assets move down the 10-year Treasury rate, or whatever maturity you are doing.  And then there are other studies that translate that into a funds rate–type of decision.  Putting it in terms of the funds rate, and perhaps relaxing the zero lower bound constraint would be a way that these models could, in an indirect way, handle that.  QE1 seems different, and that is handled directly in the New York model because when QE1 came along, a lot of spreads went down quite rapidly.  And those do directly affect what is going on in the New York and Chicago models.  For Philadelphia, in the Prism model, it’s going to affect what kind of marginal efficiency of investment shocks we are going to be seeing.  But I regard QE1 and QE2 as two different policies that the models would incorporate in two different ways.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's views and observations regarding QE1 and QE2 and how they are incorporated into different models.


Passage number 22.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The passage only states "President Bullard," which does not give any context or indication of any specific disagreement or contention.


Passage number 23.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to commend the staff for excellent work here on the DSGE framework, and, of course, I’m a big champion of this kind of work.  I think DSGE models are very useful for organizing our thinking on important aspects of macroeconomic behavior.  The best and most valuable feature is that everything has to add up in the model:  Equilibrium conditions and budget constraints are respected, expectations are treated consistently, and businesses and households are viewed as doing the best they can, given the environment and the prices that they face.  In some sense, DSGE is the only game in town, so it’s really just economic models. The key use is to investigate pet theories.  We policymakers often have a few fundamental driving factors in our minds when thinking about how to interpret macroeconomic events.  One can build a DSGE model with those factors in play, and then see what the implications would be for key macroeconomic variables.  That is very much what is going on here in this set of papers.  Often, perhaps very often, the proposed explanation for the event will not match some key facts.  I do not regard that as a failure so much as a key piece of information.  It is very informative because it suggests where the theory is right and where it needs improvement, and it helps modify our thinking relative to our priors that are embodied in our pet theories.  So at its best, this process can be extremely valuable in making the types of judgments that have to be made around this table. One remark that I do have, and I want to get your comment on, is that I do not think forecasting is necessarily a good metric for models like this.  Macroeconomic systems have a certain amount of ambient noise in them.  Because of this noise, there will always be clear limits to how well we can forecast.  We do not really forecast the economy at all.  We really track the economy in an engineering sense.  And when we have to predict, we naturally predict that the variables that are away from their means will simply return to their means.  So better forecasting may not be a reasonable expectation for this class of models, or really for any models, that we might write down.  The goal, instead, is better policy.  An alternative policy may deliver dramatically better outcomes for households, even though the forecastability of the economy has not improved at all.  That is, under policy A, we would obtain one equilibrium outcome, and under policy B, a different equilibrium outcome, and one of these two possibilities may be strongly preferred to the other.  But the forecastability is the same in both cases due to the ambient noise, and due to the fact that a good forecast will actually change behavior in the economy—we are talking about forward-looking businesses and households in the economy—and that will reduce forecastability.  There are going to be limits to how well you are going to be able to forecast in a macroeconomic system.  DSGE models, at their best, can be very useful in identifying better policy interventions, even when there is no improvement in forecastability.  I don’t know what you think about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is expressing his support and commendation for the DSGE framework and its use in organizing macroeconomic thinking. He also shares his view on forecasting and the goals of modeling.


Passage number 24.
 MR. DOTSEY.  I agree with part of it, and I disagree with part of it.  I agree with you that forecasting should not be the only emphasis on these models.  These are small models that are tightly parameterized.  I don’t share Mike Kiley’s view that the glass is half empty.  I say, “The glass is half full,” and that these models, as tightly parameterized as they are, and not taking account of all the additional degrees of freedom that the big models have, are doing about as well.  However, if they were forecasting so abominably that we thought that they had no attachment with reality, then we might want to step back and ask, “Do we really want to use these models for any of the other things they are designed to do.”  The fact that they are forecasting about as well as reduced form models, which is pretty good, suggests that they are in an area where they can do the types of experiments you want and be informative as well. So I agree with the general thrust of what you are saying, but I think forecasting still is somewhat important.  I think the Committee would not want to pay attention to models that couldn’t forecast at all.  For instance, if we did the Great Recession exercise, and we all found out that technology shocks were driving the entire Great Recession, you might ask, “Well, why would I want to look at these models for analyzing anything that looked like a banking crisis in any detail.”  But we didn’t find that, so that’s reassuring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker agrees with part of the passage and disagrees with another part, but there is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 25.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage is not provided. Please provide the passage in question so that I can help answer your question accurately.


Passage number 26.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank all of the staff that contributed to this project.  I agree that it’s a great example of collaboration.  I’ve heard accounts of how things are going in Chicago, and I think that it’s been very exciting that people have been working so well together. I’m very sympathetic to the comments that President Bullard just made, and it makes me think about what the role of judgment is in so much of our analysis, and on the occasion of Dave Stockton’s last meeting, I think it is right to think about how important judgment is.  As I think about how the staff forecast is put together, there are a lot of different analyses that need to be taken into account in order to put together the type of forecast that’s very difficult to get out of a model, even one as flexible as FRB/US or one like the DSGE models.  But I think that the FRB/US model and the DSGE models can help inform how those analyses and forecasts evolve, if not quarter by quarter, then over time, and to get the story.  What I like so much about the DSGE models, at least in terms of how we think about it in our Bank, is that they tell a story about how things are playing out in the economy.  There’s really a beginning and a middle and an end to this story.  There’s a beginning that starts off with the exogenous impulse, the shock, however you want to characterize it.  There’s a middle:  There’s the propagation that the model grinds out.  And there’s an end as the economy goes through the transition to the longer-term resting point.  I think it’s very valuable to understand some of the stories that these models can tell, and I agree with Jim that it may not generate the best forecast, but it helps us with better policy thinking. Getting to my question, here’s an example that I’m thinking we might struggle with over the coming meetings or longer.  Coming through the expansion in the middle of the past decade, we saw strong growth, and we thought that that was associated with higher potential output, a higher level of output.  Then we get to the Great Recession, and we have these shocks, financial in nature, and other factors, which led to a dramatic recession, and now the models are telling us there’s a big gap.  But I think we’re going to be wondering, if we haven’t already, what about the 1970s.  What about policymaking during that time period, when policy was highly accommodative for a long period of time.  Was it to achieve something that ultimately wasn’t achievable, a higher growth rate.  Athanasios Orphanides and others have looked at that period and seen that potential output wasn’t as high as we thought.  I think these models can help inform how the current story may or may not play out.  I understand that our measures of the output gap are highly uncertain, but for each of those uncertain estimates, the model will tell a different story as to what those shocks are that led to a lower level of potential output beginning in the middle of the past decade.  I think that these kinds of analyses can help us with that.  We’ll probably have to continue to innovate on the models, but I wonder if you have a reaction to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 27.
 MR. DOTSEY.  I think that’s very similar to what Governor Yellen alluded to in terms of robustness.  Certainly, measurement error can be introduced into these models, and then robust rules in the style that John Williams’s research has explored over a number of years can be undertaken, given the kinds of uncertainty we might have about measuring a gap or even what conceptually we think a gap is.  I think these models can certainly deal with what kind of rules would be most beneficial under those types of uncertainty.  A lot of John’s work was in a linear rational expectations environment and some of it was in a learning environment, and both of those types of environments are amenable to the scale of models that we have on the table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with Governor Yellen's statement and discussing the potential for robust rules in economic models.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states that there are other questions to be addressed without presenting any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 29.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you.  I, too, want to commend the staff.  This is an excellent use of your time and energy, and I found it very useful.  These might not be at the ideal state we’d want them to be at and are certainly not ready to fully supplant FRB/US in our arsenal, and I’m not sure we’d ever want to.  But to me they look like they provide a really excellent complement to what we have, and I would encourage you to keep working at this and give us some practice with it. I think you’re right about the advantages of this.  I agree with what President Bullard and President Evans said, that the coherence of these models offers a tremendous advantage.  They’re internally consistent.  There’s a clear narrative that emerges, and you can take the narrative to the real world, and you can say, “All right.  Do I see this element of the narrative in the real world.”  One way to think about these models is as an artificial world.  It’s like Second Life or these online universes, only you guys haven’t done the graphics engines yet.  [Laughter]  The way to work with them is this interplay between looking at the model, seeing what it’s telling you, looking at reality, going back and maybe changing the model or reinterpreting the model—and I think that practice with that is what’s going to both improve the model and give us a better sense of how to use it. In reading the memos, I found myself in unfamiliar terrain because we’re used to talking about macroeconomic conditions and the macroeconomic outlook using a certain kind of language, but we’re not used to saying “marginal efficiency of investment.”  I mean, you don’t see Larry Meyer saying “marginal efficiency of investment” or “risk premium shocks” very often.  So I think, while we know how useful these models are, it’s going to take some practice in terms of thinking in the categories that the models lead you to think within. I have a question, and this is more for Dave Reifschneider than you, but your reaction would be useful as well.  It has to do with this limitation you cited, that they’re not large scale yet, and it made me think back to an article Chris Sims wrote many years ago about the Board’s forecasting procedure.  He said that it’s articulated at such a disaggregate level that you can compare model behavior in individual sectors with industry analysts, and you get this interplay between model and industry analysts.  Now, you don’t have the chemical industry per se or anything at that level of detail, although in certain cases, like housing, you do have individual sectors.  I was just wondering how much of a limitation you think that is. That said, I commend you guys for doing this.  I think it would be useful for us to see this on a regular basis, like two or four times a year, and to get this kind of a package.  Maybe we wouldn’t need to spend as much time on it because you’ve introduced us to the structure, but we could take a little time to work it into our practice.  I think that would be really valuable.  I’d just emphasize one thing, and this harkens back to discussions we had about two years ago.  There really isn’t an alternative to models.  This goes with what President Bullard said.  The advantage of these things is that you put the cards on the table.  If you have a narrative, if you are telling a story, if you think you know or have a sense of what’s likely to happen, you’ve got a model in your head.  These at least have the benefit of putting everything about it on the table and checking that it’s an internally consistent model.  With that, I’d be interested in a response to the question about scale.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is commending the staff and expressing their support for the models being discussed. They also acknowledge that there might be limitations to the models, but overall, they find them valuable and useful.


Passage number 30.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Scale is a difficult issue because the interests of the FOMC are very diverse, and one might think, “Oh, to handle all the sorts of questions that come up, we’d have to build this gigantic thing.”  And FRB/US is pretty big, but it does not have the scale that covers all the questions the Committee does.  So we have to supplement FRB/US with a lot of other types of analyses.  Some of that we can do in DSGE models.  When we go with SIGMA, for example, we’re doing a lot of international analysis, and we’re using a different model for that because it’s well designed for answering those sorts of questions.  EDO also does a better job of handling certain things, such as how you’re interpreting data in real time, or doing signal extraction about what’s really going on in the supply side, or what might be going on with risk premiums or things like that.  That’s a statement that all sorts of different models bring different things to the table.  That’s also why, in preparing the staff forecast, we use single equation models, we use reduced form models, we use special-purpose models—we do all sorts of thing.  We’ve been maintaining a tradition of trying to not pile all our eggs in one basket, which some other central banks, particularly smaller central banks, have had to do because they have limited staff resources.  We’ve had the luxury, between both the Board and the System as a whole, of being able to maintain a variety of models, pose a variety of questions, and get a variety of analyses, and I think that’s a strength. At some point you face the question, if you are dealing with a workhorse model, of what’s the minimal set of things that has to be in it to be useful for the Committee.  We faced that with FRB/US; we didn’t put in everything, but we put in a great deal.  I don’t know that a workhorse model has to be as big as FRB/US; it doesn’t have to have as many bells and whistles.  It’s possible—and I think this is what we have been doing in recent years—that we can do the job with multiple models as opposed to relying solely on one model.  Along those lines, if you think about the forecasting process underlying the Tealbook analysis that we’ve been giving the Committee over the past couple of years or so, it is informed by FRB/US and EDO as well as a whole bunch of other things.  FRB/US, EDO, and SIGMA also appear in the Alternative Scenarios, and EDO and FRB/US are used in Book B analyses et cetera.  So we’re using a range of models, and it’s a question of what tool seems most useful for the particular question at hand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining the use of different models and the advantages of using a variety of models rather than relying solely on one model. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 31.
 MR. DOTSEY.  I agree exactly with David.  I won’t reiterate.  You eloquently, probably more than I, indicated what some of the strengths of these models are, but I think that they are still a bit too small.  For example, fiscal policies are problematic; these models don’t have distortionary taxation and details along those lines.  We’re also building better financial intermediation sectors, which are really important, and there may be a few other things.  Do we have to go to the level of a chemical industry.  Probably not, and we would lose the transparency that these models can give that’s so important.  But like Dave just indicated, I think the group involved in the project views our work as complementary work for the Committee; these models have certain strengths, and we’d like to make them available to the Committee.  And you have other models that have other strengths, and like you’re saying, you should be looking at more than one thing because we don’t have the model of the United States economy or the world economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with David's viewpoint and providing additional thoughts and suggestions. They mention that the models they are discussing have certain strengths but also acknowledge the need to consider other models as well.


Passage number 32.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions the name "President Kocherlakota" and does not provide any additional information or context to indicate if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 33.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll, first of all, second what others have said, that this was a really excellent piece of staff work.  I spent the week reading through it very carefully with the help of my research director, Kei-Mu Yi, and we learned a tremendous amount in part because people were really generous with their time in answering all of our questions.  We really appreciate it.  I wanted to follow up on something that Governor Yellen and President Lacker said about what would be interesting to see going forward.  I think it would be great for the group of workers on this project, as well as the Committee, to see output from this project, I would say, on a quarterly basis—not as much as we saw here, but something more concise along the lines of, What’s the forecast.  What’s the story behind the forecast.  I could imagine a report of about a page and a half that would be pretty useful. A couple of quick comments about why this would be useful, beyond the fact that I think that we don’t have the model of the U.S. economy and seeing things from a wider range of models would be good along those lines:  One is something that Governor Warsh mentioned last year, and I thought it was a great point.  Governor Warsh was struggling with how to get Reserve Bank economists more integrated into the process of thinking about the FOMC; this project is one way this can happen because we already have that kind of interaction taking place, and I think that would be fantastic.  The other thing that I’ll emphasize about these models—and Mike, quite rightly, I think, has pointed to some of their failings or deficiencies—is that I am really impressed with how fast people have been able to build on them in the past two or three years, especially in light of events.  You don’t want to think, in our constantly changing environment, about a model as being a static object; it’s more of a dynamic process.  We’re always going to be building and adding onto it, and these models have proven very amenable to that process, in part, I think, because of their structure, but also in part because this is what the people in academics are really good at using.  For instance, Mike was mentioning the fact that the models that were being used within the current DSGE group don’t have unemployment.  Well, there’s a very nice paper that just came out, I guess, a couple of months ago by Galí, Smets, and Wouters that is a DSGE framework that builds in unemployment.  I think that we’re going to be able to build better models through our interactions with the academe by having this kind of model, or a suite of models, as Governor Yellen said, that we constantly use.  I think the dialogue about what we want to see and what this group can provide would be better if we start to see something from them on an ongoing basis.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a positive response to the staff work and a suggestion for future output.


Passage number 34.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only consists of one short sentence that expresses a simple gratitude towards President Plosser. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 35.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Most of what I wanted to say has already been said.  I think most of you remember the conversation a year ago when we talked about inflation dynamics.  A lot of the discussion was about different models that produce different types of inflation; that’s where all of this got started a little over a year ago, and they’ve made a great effort to pull this together.  I would like to reinforce what Narayana just said, about seeing a summary of these models on a fairly regular basis.  It’s a lot about model uncertainty.  We need to understand that we don’t know the true models.  The second thing I want to tie back into is that there are lots of potential directions this can lead us and having this work being done in the System allows us to do potentially a wide range of things, so I want to encourage the production of that information.  If we’re working with multiple models in the System, they will give us a platform as Janet Yellen said, for thinking about simple rules or robust rules.  We’ll learn over time what the Committee wants to hear and how we’ll best communicate that, but I think this is very good work and will supplement things that go on in this Committee very well.  I want to encourage that process.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, expresses agreement with what Narayana said and encourages the continuation of the work being done in the System.


Passage number 36.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, President Plosser.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 37.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My preference, unconstrained, would be to omit the entire sentence that begins, “In particular, the size of the securities portfolio,” because I think it unnecessarily commits us to the direction of a corridor system.  But failing that, I am willing to live with the sentence as it stands without the bracketed language.  Let me explain why that’s my strong preference.  My view is that there’s no reason to commit to a corridor system now.  In the next few years we will learn a lot about operating a floor system.  It doesn’t make sense to commit to a corridor when we don’t have all the available information to make an informed choice about whether we prefer a corridor system or a floor system.  And the costs of waiting to get this information are very low, because market participants are not at all focused or care about whether we make this choice today.  So if we wait, nothing bad happens; there is really very little cost to waiting. Now, I agree with President Plosser that, if there was no possible chance that a floor system could be superior to a corridor system, there would be no point in waiting to get new information.  But I do think that there are a number of reasons to think that the floor system might potentially be superior.  So I want to talk about some of the potential benefits of a floor system. The first thing is that if we had a floor system, there would be more reserves in the banking system, and that might actually help the payment system operate more efficiently.  With a corridor system, in contrast, you are going to have more intraday credit extension, and you are going to have more interbank transactions as people try to get to flat, vis-à-vis one another.  As a result, there is going to be more interconnectedness through the banking system.  With a floor system, we anticipate that some of the major payment systems like CHIPS and DTC would have fewer payment fails, because there would be more lubricant in the system.  There would be earlier settlement times, and you would have fewer delays in terms of executing payments.  And there would be less congestion in terms of settling the systems at the end of the day.  A second potential benefit of a floor system is that excess reserves could help banks satisfy their liquidity requirements more easily because there would be more liquidity in the system as a starting point.  Third, it’s very possible that a floor system might be operationally more efficient.  If you think about how the SOMA Manager would execute operations on a day-to-day basis in a corridor system, every day the Desk would have to do a careful calculation of money demand, money supply, and how much reserves need to be added or drained from the system.  A lot of those fine-tuning operations would probably go away in a floor system because the little shocks to money demand and money supply would not have consequences for the actual level of short-term rates.  As a result, the operations conducted by the SOMA Manager would be much simpler.  And fourth, a floor system might reduce the volatility in short-term interest rates that is caused by those shocks in money demand and money supply.  In other words, the SOMA Manager makes a forecast of how many reserves the system needs to keep the funds rate at its target.  But to the extent that the SOMA Manager makes a bad forecast and does not hit the desired demand for reserves in the system, then that introduces volatility into short-term rates. Now, in all of this, I’m not saying I favor a floor system.  I’m not arguing for a floor system over a corridor system.  All I am arguing is that it is bad policy to rule out a floor system at the current time given the chance to learn a lot about how a floor system operates in practice.  Now, Charlie said just now, and in his note, that in the April FOMC minutes, the Committee members generally favored a corridor system.  I went back and looked at the minutes, and I don’t read it quite the same way.  Here is what the minutes said, at least the sentences I picked out of the minutes:  “Some participants also noted their preferences about the longer-run framework for monetary policy implementation.  Most of these participants”—those who had noted their preferences—“indicated that they preferred that monetary policy eventually operate through a corridor-type system.”  So that’s most of some participants, and “most” of “some participants,” as far as I can tell, doesn’t necessarily mean a majority.  I think the staff actually counted seven people who expressed a preference for a corridor system.  Another important thing is that this was really not put on the table as something that we are actually considering, corridor versus floor.  Do we want to rule out a floor system at the current time.  This is not something that we really discussed or debated at the last meeting.  So what I’m asking is to keep the current language in place, without the bracketed language.  I think that is a reasonable compromise.  Let’s learn before we commit to either a corridor or a floor system. Charlie raised the issue that a floor system would presumably allow a balance sheet of any particular size.  I would offer President Plosser the notion that we could commit to keeping that off the table by language that might say something like, “the smallest balance sheet consistent with what is needed for the efficient execution of monetary policy.”  So if you’re really worried that a floor system might lead to an unlimited balance sheet size, we could take that off the table by basically committing to the smallest balance sheet necessary for the efficient implementation of policy.  I think that would address your concerns that the balance sheet would be this discretionary tool of policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker disagrees with the idea of committing to a corridor system and argues for keeping the possibility of a floor system open in order to gather more information and potentially reap the benefits of a floor system. They also disagree with the interpretation of the April FOMC minutes and the assumption that a majority of participants favored a corridor system.


Passage number 38.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much, both of you, for very cogent arguments.  Also, I should say that the Vice Chairman and President Plosser have both said that they are prepared to live with, or are prepared to accept, whatever the Committee decides.  Are there any pressing questions for either the Vice Chairman or President Plosser.  [No response]  All right.  What I would like to do now is take a straw vote on this particular item, and abstentions are okay.  This is for all participants.  How many would like to keep the language where it is and say “the federal funds rate near its target” through open market operations, but exclude specific reference to a corridor system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 39.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman, can I just make one comment.  One of the concerns about the floor system that I didn’t mention earlier is that under a floor system, we don’t know for sure what will happen to the fed funds market, whether or not it will survive, and therefore whether or not we can keep a rate depending on whether that says an active market when there are plenty of reserves.  I don’t know the answer to that question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply one person expressing a concern and stating that they do not have an answer to a specific question.


Passage number 40.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think we do know that, because we have a federal funds market even today, with a balance sheet that is much bigger than what we would operate under a floor system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or ideas that would indicate contention or disagreement. It is just stating a observation or opinion.


Passage number 41.
 MR. PLOSSER.  But the volumes are way down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser simply states a fact that the volumes are way down.


Passage number 42.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Right.  But I think we have a balance sheet today that is far greater than what we would have under any reasonable floor system that we would think to operate.  And we haven’t flooded the market, so I don’t think that’s a fair comparison.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their belief that the current balance sheet is larger than it would be under a different system and that the market hasn't been flooded, suggesting that a fair comparison cannot be made.


Passage number 43.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Lacker without providing any context or information to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 44.
 MR. LACKER.  I view the Vice Chairman’s proposed language change about “the smallest balance sheet consistent with” as attractive because it is attempting to commit to avoiding the kind of credit allocation that would come from expanding our balance sheet at a given funds rate, which is one of the major concerns.  In your straw poll, I was wondering if you could find a way to have that be an option.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Lacker's positive view and suggestion regarding a proposed language change.


Passage number 45.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Let’s firm up the language.  It was, “and the associated quantity of bank reserves are expected to be reduced to levels”—“the smallest levels consistent with the efficient implementation . . .”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 46.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That would be fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states that "That would be fine."


Passage number 47.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I’ll come back to that in just a second.  I’m aware of Arrow’s voting paradoxes and all that.  [Laughter]  So what I would like to do is the following.  I’m going to ask for a straw vote on the original two propositions, and then we’ll take the winner and ask if we would like to compare it with this alternative language.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging their awareness of Arrow's voting paradoxes in a light-hearted manner, but there is no clear disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 48.
 MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman, I think if we went to the minimum size of the balance sheet, then there would be no difference between the two systems.  Is that right, or very little difference.  There’s a point of continuity there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating his belief that if they were to reduce the size of the balance sheet to a minimum, there would be little or no difference between the two systems. He is not opposing or contradicting any previous statements or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 49.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I knew this was going to happen.  [Laughter]  The efficient implementation of monetary policy suggests that if there are substantial benefits from a floor system in payments and in reducing volatility and so on, then the smallest balance sheet would be consistent with a floor system. All right.  Debbie, will you help me count.  Those in favor of the original language:  “near its target,” without referring to a corridor system.  [Show of hands]  Okay.  So the majority are in favor of that. Then, we want to compare that with the following language:  “The associated quantity of bank reserves are expected to be reduced to the smallest levels that would be consistent with the efficient implementation of monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents two options for language and asks for a show of hands to determine which option the majority prefers. This indicates that there is contention and differing opinions on which language to use.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 50.
” MR. PLOSSER.  Can I question the word “efficient” here.  What do we mean by that.  What are the criteria to decide what “efficient” is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, questions the word "efficient" and asks for clarification on its meaning and criteria. This suggests a disagreement or lack of agreement on the definition and parameters of efficiency.


Passage number 51.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It leaves the possibilities open.  On the one hand it says that if we were to go to a floor system, we would have the smallest balance sheet that would allow that system to work properly.  But “efficient implementation” means that we would have to judge that that smallest balance sheet version of the floor system is effective in maintaining the funds rate near the target, minimizing volatility, and achieving collateral benefits like improved payment systems and the like. All right.  Who favors the change that I just described:  “reduced to the smallest levels that would be consistent with the efficient implementation of monetary policy”.  Can I see hands, please.  [Show of hands]  Okay.  I guess that’s going to be a compromise.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 52.
  MR. FISHER.  I would just ask for clarification whether this does not rule out our going to a corridor system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is a request for clarification but no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 53.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Absolutely not.  In fact, my own personal view is that it’s likely the preferred system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement expresses a personal opinion without opposing or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 54.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you" does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 55.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota, a word on your amendments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 56.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Sure.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My proposed change was grounded in my feeling that when we remove this phrase “extended period,” it will be a very important step for the Committee in the process of exit.  I was concerned about the fact that, at least in my own mind, I was not clear about what that step is supposed to be communicating.  I felt it was important, as best we can, to have some kind of shared understanding of what that step would mean.  I have offered, by way of change, my own interpretation of what that step would mean.  It could be that, as we will find out shortly, there is sufficient lack of consensus on this point and that we don’t want to finalize it at this time.  But I my main point is that I think we should have some clarity about what this step would mean as part of the exit process.  In terms of my own thinking about it, what it would mean to me is that at that point, we would be anticipating that the first increase would be two to four meetings out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and concerns about the proposed change, but there is no mention of any opposing viewpoints or debates.


Passage number 57.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Is there anyone who, conditional on making this change, would prefer a different time than three to six months.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply asking if anyone has a different preference for the timing of the change.


Passage number 58.
 MS. YELLEN.  I have a difficulty with President Kocherlakota’s interpretation of “extended period,” although I completely agree with him that it’s appropriate for us to discuss and clarify what we mean.  I don’t think that dropping “extended period” should imply that the Committee anticipates raising the target funds rate in three to six months.  I would, instead, say that it means it will be at least three to six months.  It could be a lot longer, because my interpretation is that when we include “extended period” language in the statement, we are saying the FOMC sees very low probability that it will need to tighten in three to six months, or two to four meetings.  Once the probability has risen sufficiently that we think we might need to tighten—but we could be talking about a probability that is a lot lower than 50 percent—then it becomes appropriate to drop the language to give the Committee flexibility to move as needed.  But when we drop it, we may not anticipate moving.  The odds may be lower than 50 percent.  And, in fact, the funds rate target could well—depending on how things materialize—stay exceptionally low for a very long time, even though we got rid of the language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Yellen is expressing her own interpretation and understanding of the language used and clarifying her viewpoint.


Passage number 59.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Governor Yellen, are you proposing to add the words “at least” before the word “three”.  Is that the substance of the proposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Governor Yellen is simply asking a clarification question about the proposal.


Passage number 60.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Conditional on making the change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 61.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I am perfectly happy with that as an amendment, if that’s the nature of the amendment.  I don’t have a problem with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 62.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Pretty substantively different.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Pretty substantively different" is a statement that indicates a difference between two things, suggesting that there may be disagreement or contention. However, without additional context, it is not possible to determine the exact nature of the disagreement.


Passage number 63.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with Governor Yellen’s statement because, exactly as she says, saying that you are not going to keep the federal funds rate low for an extended period does not necessarily mean you are going to tighten three to six months later.  It depends on the data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements. Instead, it simply agrees with Governor Yellen's statement and explains that the decision to tighten the federal funds rate depends on the data.


Passage number 64.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We don’t need to have a complete debate about it.  [Laughter]  Give us a chance to vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply requesting for a chance to vote without any opposition being mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 65.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’m a little bit concerned about symmetry here.  The Chairman at one point last year talked about “extended period,” and we gave the example where, in the Greenspan era, they dropped some language that they changed the very next meeting.  Could we be in an environment where we didn’t want to wait that long—that things would change, and we may have to move sooner than three months.  I’m a little bit worried about the asymmetry that you are building into it that might put us at risk of not moving as fast as we might have to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser expresses concern about the asymmetry built into the policy decision, suggesting that there might be a need to move interest rates sooner than the proposed three-month period.


Passage number 66.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It does say “anticipates.”  But that’s fine.  By the way, when asked about this, without a great deal of forethought, in my press conference in April, I said “a couple of meetings,” which is about three months, but it could be more, obviously.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the statement in question is fine and provides additional clarification without any opposition or contradiction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 67.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, I just want to remind the Committee that what we are discussing here are exit strategy principles and not concrete intentions.  And whether or not there are any conceptual concerns with the addition of Narayana’s sentence, I would say that it does somewhat stick out from a tonal perspective in the sense that it reflects a current anticipation and a precise number of months.  If you look through the tone of the principles, there really is nowhere else where we indicate with precision what exactly the timing would be.  One possible way of moving through this is to pick up the “probable” language that we use in paragraph 5, where we indicate “probably within a few months” and tack that onto the end of the first sentence in paragraph 4, where we could then indicate that it would probably be within a half-year, or whatever it is, after the modification of the forward guidance.  I think that would be more consistent with the tone of the set of principles that we’re talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Raskin, is pointing out that Narayana's sentence sticks out and has a different tone compared to the rest of the principles. She suggests using language similar to that used in paragraph 5 to maintain consistency.


Passage number 68.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I understand that point, but “probably within a few months” is likely shorter than most people would want to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges understanding a point and expresses their opinion that the time frame mentioned ("probably within a few months") is shorter than what most people would prefer to say or believe.


Passage number 69.
 MS. RASKIN.  I would suggest, “probably within a half-year after the modification of the forward guidance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of suggestion from Ms. Raskin.


Passage number 70.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 71.
 MR. FISHER.  I have problems with the ritualistic sequencing of all this.  We’ll talk about that later.  But in this case, just to take your concern, Governor Yellen, and Mr. Plosser’s excellent point, I would just say, “When economic conditions warrant, the Committee will begin raising its target for the federal funds rate.”  We don’t know if we’re going to do it within one month, three months, or six months.  Why are we pinning ourselves down here.  And then we create expectations.  Even saying “a couple of meetings,” Mr. Chairman, again—with all due respect—we’ll do it when it’s appropriate.  So why not simplify the language.  I respect President Kocherlakota immensely, but I think we are making this much more complicated than we should.  I would simply have it say, “When economic conditions warrant, the Committee will begin raising its target for the fed funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Fisher disagrees with the language and sequencing of the Committee's statement, and argues for a simpler approach without specifying timeframes or using complex language.


Passage number 72.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that’s the status quo, basically.  Let me take President Rosengren and President Bullard, if I could ask your indulgence, and then we could go to the vote.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage describes a sequence of actions and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 73.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  My preference would be to have no timing in this set of principles.  This is a sequence discussion, and I’m very comfortable with the sequence, but I’m less comfortable the more we tie it to timing.  And the more we tie it to timing, the harder it’s going to be to get a consensus on when the timing should start.  So I think we should think carefully about hardwiring the timing.  The more language we put in here that gets into timing, the more likely it is that we are going to have a discontinuity.  I really think this should be a sequencing, not a timing, discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing disagreement with the idea of including timing in the set of principles. They argue that tying the principles to timing would make it difficult to reach a consensus on when the timing should start, and that it may cause discontinuity. Therefore, they suggest thinking carefully about hardwiring the timing and propose that the discussion should focus on sequencing rather than timing.


Passage number 74.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states the title or position of President Bullard and does not provide any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 75.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  I’ll also be brief.  I’ll agree with President Rosengren and President Fisher that it’s not so clear why we want to tie this down.  At the time that we make such a decision, we’ll want to assess economic conditions and give an indication that the Committee currently anticipates a certain timing.  That seems to me to be the way the Committee has operated in the past, and it would make a lot of sense in this circumstance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 76.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Let’s go to a straw vote.  How many would like to retain the existing language, which says, “When economic conditions warrant, the Committee’s next step in the process of policy normalization will be to begin raising its target for the federal funds rate, and from that point on, changing the level,” and it does not make reference to three to six months.  How many prefer that approach.  [Show of hands]  Okay.  So, I think, Narayana, you’re outvoted.  Your point about clarity is a good one, and these are actually very subtle points, because if you are, for example, interested in providing more accommodation, saying that it will be at least three months is one way.  However, I think the Committee has spoken on that. So we have a document.  We have 20 minutes or so, and I am going to ask each participant to say, first, if you can broadly accept this.  If you have a couple of objections to things that are not your first best but you’re still willing to accept it, of course, you can say that.  If you have some reason that you cannot accept it, then explain what that is.  We’ll keep track of that and try to put together an appropriate summary for the minutes, which of course will be subject to the Committee’s vote and approval.  Let me begin with President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the Committee's preference for language and asking for participants' acceptance or objections to the proposed document.


Passage number 77.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I am very happy with this document.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman and the staff, for preparing it.  I think it’s a very valuable practice for us to continue to do this, to summarize consensus as we develop it, at least for internal purposes.  I realize this will not be released publicly, but we can even think about going to the next step, of releasing such consensus publicly.  But at least for our internal purposes, I think it’s great to do these summaries, and I’m very happy with the document as is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses agreement and satisfaction with the document and appreciates the effort put into its preparation. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 78.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude to Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 79.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m not sure if Richard and Eric would extend their observations to the other time parameters that are in here:  “At same time or relatively soon thereafter.”  I’m slightly uncomfortable with those, but if there’s a consensus around the language that’s in here, I’m happy to go with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses a slight discomfort but seems willing to go along with the consensus if there is one.


Passage number 80.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Rosengren.


Passage number 81.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I agree with Governor Tarullo.  The goal is to communicate sequence but maintain the flexibility to react to changes in economic conditions.  I’m very comfortable with the sequence that’s laid out in this memo, but I prefer basically no time subscripts in the document.  So let me just give one example.  My own personal preference would be to shrink the balance sheet first and allow time to pass so that the ability to affect interest rates is enhanced.  If instead we decide to tie the end of reinvesting to the ending of forward guidance, I would then want to end the reinvesting at a later time than I would if they were not tied.  So my personal preference would be, for example, in paragraph 3, to change the phrase “At the same time or relatively soon thereafter,” and make that the word “next,” so it would read, “Next, the Committee will modify its forward guidance.”  And then in paragraph 5, in the second line, I’d like to take out “probably within a few months” and just leave the actual timing to be figured out, depending on economic conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there is a difference in personal preference expressed by Mr. Rosengren, there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 82.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are you amenable to the whole document collectively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if the listener is willing or open to considering the entire document as a whole.


Passage number 83.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I’m comfortable with the document.  I could go with it as it is, but my preference would be to take out the time dimension.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker states their preference for taking out the time dimension, but there is no mention of any disagreement or contention with anyone else. Thus, there does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 84.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  A couple of participants have raised the time dimension issue, and President Rosengren pointed out two places.  If there are others who have similar concerns, I think they should probably say so.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that a couple of participants have raised the issue of the time dimension and suggests that if others have similar concerns, they should also speak up.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 85.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I’m in favor, as is President Rosengren and I sense Governor Tarullo, of taking all time references out; I think it unnecessarily binds us.  So I wouldn’t include “probably within a few months” in the fifth paragraph and “over a period of four to five years” in the sixth paragraph.  Any reference to time, I think, puts us in a straitjacket, and conditions may well change.  I know no one at this table who five years ago expected us to be where we are today.  So it just doesn’t make sense to me to have a specific time reference, and that would be my first point.  I’m a little uncomfortable, possibly out of ignorance, as to whether it makes sense to declare that we would raise rates first and then sell.  It might incur losses.  It might move the yield curve.  I would like to say, in paragraph 5, “Sales of agency securities from the SOMA will likely commence sometime after the first increase in the target for the federal funds rate,” but then go on to say, “though the timing of sales,” and then use the very last part of that sentence, “could be adjusted in response to material changes in the economic outlook or financial conditions.”  To me that’s operationally a commonsense way to phrase it, rather than saying “probably within a few months.” In summary, I would like all time references to be taken out.  I think that’s a sensible thing to do.  I would also suggest an editorial change in the fifth paragraph in that it allows us at least the opportunity to adjust the timing.  In the language in paragraph 5, I would say, “Sales of agency securities from the SOMA will likely commence sometime after the first increase in the target for the federal funds rate, though the timing of the sales could be adjusted in response to material changes in the economic outlook or financial conditions.”  I think we need to be as opportunistic going out as we were going in.  I understand the need for us to have a sense of what our priorities are, but I don’t want to be locked in, in case economic or financial opportunities present themselves.  And to me, that would be a sensible way to write that sentence or that paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the following passage. Mr. Fisher is arguing against including time references in the fifth and sixth paragraphs and suggests taking them out completely. He believes that including time references puts the committee in a straitjacket and that conditions may change. He also suggests an editorial change in the fifth paragraph to allow for the timing of sales to be adjusted in response to changes in economic outlook or financial conditions. Overall, Mr. Fisher is arguing for more flexibility and avoiding specific time references in the passage.


Passage number 86.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  If others share this view, I think we should just downplay the timing issues in our discussion in the minutes.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. President Bullard is expressing his own view and suggesting a course of action if others share the same view.


Passage number 87.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m not very comfortable with this timing sequence.  As you know, I prefer a more explicit LIFO or last in–first out exit strategy than the one outlined in this “Exit Strategy Principles” document.  The principles do call for a balance sheet–first strategy in that the first step is to cease or reduce reinvestment.  I would follow that step with asset sales and manage the balance sheet down in a state-contingent manner. My judgment is that the recent asset purchases and the associated buildup of the size of the balance sheet had a fairly clear effect on expected inflation in the United States.  This policy helped us avoid the mildly deflationary outcome that Japan has experienced over the past decade or more.  Inflation has moved higher and more quickly than would have been predicted without the asset purchases.  I do not think that these purchases were neutral, and I do not expect asset sales to be neutral.  I think it would be a bit more prudent to sell assets first and in relatively small amounts and then gauge the effects in a state-contingent manner.  This would be a balance sheet tightening as opposed to what we’ve got in the exit principles.  We could then change language and raise rates somewhat later in the process if we did it this way.  I think this would keep expectations in check while rates continue to remain at zero.  It would also dovetail with the reserve reduction in the System that will help us on the day when we want to actually raise rates.  The outlined strategy puts sales essentially on an autopilot basis.  As I see it, there’s not very much that’s optimal about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 88.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m going to take that as a no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their understanding of a response as a negative or refusal.


Passage number 89.
  [Laughter] MR. BULLARD.  That’s a no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is responding to something with laughter, indicating a positive or agreeable response.


Passage number 90.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 91.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage, as the abbreviation "MR" on its own does not provide enough information to determine the presence of disagreement.


Passage number 92.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m comfortable with this approach.  I actually think it does represent what I heard to be the consensus at the April meeting.  I am sympathetic to the point that Presidents Rosengren and Fisher brought up about being somewhat uncomfortable with the very specific timing, and I think it’s probably better to stick with the general principles of the sequencing, and I would agree with removing “probably within a few months” and the other case where we’re being very specific on timing.  I agree with the general idea of how the sequencing should go, but I will mention just one comment.  I think you and we all will be asked for the rationale behind this particular sequencing of steps.  So here we are agreeing on what the sequence is, but I know that we all will be asked by reporters why we chose one instead of another, and I think we should have some more discussion, perhaps, about that.  I’ll give you one example.  This may seem to be a no-brainer to some—maybe I’m just overthinking this or just not thinking hard enough about this, but I’m still not 100 percent clear on why reinvestments is the obvious first action out of the blocks.  Maybe if we have time at some point, we could have a discussion about not only what the right sequence is, but also what the talking points are regarding why this makes the most sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the approach and sequencing discussed, but suggests that more discussion is needed to clarify the rationale behind certain actions.


Passage number 93.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have a couple of reactions to that.  One is that stopping reinvestment is a relatively passive thing.  It doesn’t involve us actually going out and making sales.  We don’t take capital losses.  It doesn’t address nearly so directly the concerns about the MBS market being relatively oversupplied during this period.  So it seems like a more passive way to go, and, therefore, something that’s worth doing.  It also has the benefit, over a period of time, of bringing the balance sheet down.  I think one obvious argument—and I understand President Bullard’s point—for raising rates first is that if you rely on balance sheet contraction as your primary tightening tool, given market-based limits and so forth on how fast you can do that, then you push the first increase in the funds rate off quite a while potentially, and there are people, including President Hoenig and others, who think that the very low rate has damaging effects on financial stability.  That’s a tradeoff that I think some participants at least would not like. President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker presents different reactions and considerations to the idea of stopping reinvestment as a way to address oversupply in the MBS market and bring down the balance sheet. There is an acknowledgement of different perspectives and tradeoffs, but no explicit disagreement.


Passage number 94.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am very comfortable with this broad set of exit strategy principles.  I agree with the sequencing of steps in the normalization of policy, but I also favor, as others have already mentioned, removing the time references to give us more flexibility.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the passage, Ms. Pianalto expresses agreement and favorability towards the broad set of exit strategy principles and the sequencing of steps in the normalization of policy. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 95.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 96.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I prefer last in, first out, and never using reserve draining tools.  Otherwise, I can support this [laughter], and I’m not troubled by the timing references.  I think we’re trying to say what we agree on, and I think the timing references that are in there are things you can agree on.  The ones we couldn’t vote to put in were ones we didn’t agree on.  So I can support the adoption of these principles even though I’d prefer something much different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement indicates disagreement or contention as the speaker prefers a different approach but can still support the adoption of the stated principles.


Passage number 97.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Thank you. President Lockhart" indicates gratitude and respect, suggesting that there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 98.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support the principles here.  I just finding myself feeling that—and I hope this isn’t too cavalier, but—this is close enough for government work at this time.  I think we have so much to learn in this process.  There are so many unknowns that, at this juncture, I would posit some principles that we agree on without pinning ourselves down to, particularly, timing.  The sequencing here is logical, although I think it may be highly compressed when the first steps are made because the market will react and tightening will have begun in the longer rates.  I also would hope—my own personal view—that by getting this out through the press conference or however, we will reduce the chatter about exit among ourselves and in the market because I think it’s not an appropriate time for continuing chatter.  I have sympathy with the arguments regarding the corridor outcome largely because it’s the most familiar, but again, I agreed with the earlier decision.  And finally, we haven’t talked about this much, but I think President Plosser suggested three to five years if we’re going to have an explicit time frame in the document for asset sales purposes.  I thought that also made sense simply by buying more time because we don’t know exactly how long it’s going to take.  So overall, I am supportive of these.  I think this will do the job for the time being.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for the principles being discussed and offers their personal perspective on certain aspects of the topic.


Passage number 99.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a simple statement expressing gratitude from the speaker (President Hoenig) to an unspecified recipient.


Passage number 100.
 MR. HOENIG.  Mr. Chairman, I like this, thank you.  I don’t think it will end the discussion, but I think it will clarify things for people and will be very helpful, and I hope it is public as quickly as you can feel comfortable doing it.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their appreciation for the clarification provided and emphasizes the potential helpfulness of making it public quickly.


Passage number 101.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 102.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support these principles in general.  I do agree with President Rosengren’s suggestions about taking out the timing.  On item 3, I caved on that one.  I didn’t like it, but I couldn’t find better words than that.  I suppose “next” is pretty good on that link.  I think in general the sequencing here is quite good.  I didn’t like any tight links between certain actions.  They were stronger than I’d liked, and the conditionality is very appropriate here.  I can fully support this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individual expressing their opinion, Mr. Evans, states that they support the principles and agrees with President Rosengren's suggestion about removing the timing. They also mention that they didn't like item 3 but couldn't find better words, and that they believe the sequencing is quite good. There is no explicit disagreement or contention mentioned.


Passage number 103.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given statement is simply expressing gratitude and addressing President Plosser respectfully. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 104.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m generally supportive.  I think this is a big step forward in informing the public about how we’re thinking about this, and putting this out as a public document in some form will be very helpful.  Obviously, I still prefer a corridor system.  I wish we could make that more explicit.  I have one other suggestion in terms of the timing issues.  I’m comfortable with taking them out, but if we take them out, as President Fisher said, we should also take out the “four to five years” as well as the “few months” or the “relatively soon thereafter.”  Those should come out as well because we may be faster than that or longer than that.  It would be fine with me if all those would come out.  I would like to make one other suggestion, and this is basically for clarity.  In paragraph 5 where it says in the last sentence, “but it could be adjusted in response to material changes,” I would like to see that “be adjusted up or down,” to be explicit that the Committee could choose to speed up sales or slow them down—just add “up or down” after “adjusted” to be clear that they understand they could go both ways.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for the proposal and offers some suggestions for improvement, but there is no indication of disagreement with any other individual or viewpoint.


Passage number 105.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That seems like a friendly amendment.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates agreement between the speaker and the person they are speaking to.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 106.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman.  Could I just make it clear that I support taking out all the time references in every paragraph.  “Five years” and the “three years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates disagreement or contention as Mr. Fisher expresses his support for removing time references, suggesting a different viewpoint or proposal than what was previously stated.


Passage number 107.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply mentions the position of "Vice Chairman" without providing any further information or context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m comfortable with the memo as amended.  I agree with taking out the time references.  I think the only time reference that one might want to continue to include is the “over a period of four to five years,” but I think that’s too narrow, four to five years, because as this plays out, if you ended reinvestment and the agencies are writing off for several years, you might want to have a broader range.  So I’m completely happy with how the Committee decides.  I don’t feel strongly about it, but I think that one is a little different than the other time references.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement "I’m comfortable with the memo as amended" and "I agree with taking out the time references" suggest agreement. However, the statement "I think the only time reference that one might want to continue to include is the 'over a period of four to five years,' but I think that’s too narrow" suggests disagreement or contention.


Passage number 109.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Yellen without providing any additional information or context, so it cannot be determined if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 110.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the proposed exit strategy principles.  My preference is to remove the time references in line with President Rosengren’s suggestion, but I saw including the more specific time frames as an attempt to compromise.  I do think it is very valuable to reach consensus here.  I think, if we can endorse a consensus view, it will simplify our communications, reassure markets, and enhance the predictability of market responses to our actions.  I think this is very worthwhile.  I’d prefer no timing references but could live with it as is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for the proposed exit strategy principles and mentions a preference for removing time references, but also acknowledges the inclusion of time frames as an attempt to compromise. They emphasize the importance of reaching consensus and believe that endorsing a consensus view will simplify communication, reassure markets, and enhance predictability. They conclude by stating that while they would prefer no timing references, they can live with it as is.


Passage number 111.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any information or context about Governor Duke for us to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 112.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the sequencing with the elimination of all the time references.  My only concern with the document was that, as written, taking step 2 engages the gears for step 3, and taking step 4 engages the gears for steps 5 and 6—it seems like that would make it difficult to calibrate and maybe even to begin the exit strategy.  So without those, I’m fully in support of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses concern about the sequencing in the document and suggests it could make it difficult to calibrate and begin the exit strategy.


Passage number 113.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only consists of a statement of gratitude and the mention of Governor Raskin's name. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 114.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am broadly comfortable with the approach set forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am broadly comfortable with the approach set forth" indicates agreement and satisfaction with the approach mentioned. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 115.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you all very much.  This turned out to be very helpful.  [Laughter]  I appreciate the comments.  When asked, in fact, I think I will say a little bit about this in the press conference, with a strong caveat that this does not imply immediate implementation of this exit.  I have heard very clearly, I think, from a majority that we should take out timing references, and so I will do that in my public communication.  I suggest as a next step that the staff might try to rewrite this a little bit and see if it can gain the same level of support or even more support than it had today.  If it does, we could consider making it an addendum to the minutes.  If not, or if there are enough serious concerns, then the alternative is to describe the basic points with the appropriate “most” or “all” or whatever, as it applies.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing gratitude for the help received, acknowledging comments, and discussing potential next steps without any conflicts or disputes.


Passage number 116.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, I heard that there might be support for actually making it an addendum to the minutes—something pretty close to what we actually talked about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply relaying information they heard about the possibility of making something an addendum to the minutes.


Passage number 117.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, I’m much more optimistic about that than I was an hour ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement only expresses the speaker's personal change in attitude or perspective and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 118.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Is your proposal to circulate something tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given statement. It is simply asking about a proposal to circulate something tomorrow and does not provoke any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 119.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I certainly don’t want to get involved in an editing session here, given the time constraints and so on.  Why don’t we simply send out something soon, get feedback, make a judgment about whether or not we’ve made a Pareto improvement on this existing document, and then, based on that overall assessment, we can decide how to proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It suggests a practical approach to handling a situation, without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 120.
 MR. FISHER.  Just a thought—in terms of what you say tomorrow, which I think is very, very important, I would say as little as possible about this subject unless you’re pressed, and the reason for that is, first, we made substantial progress, but we still have more to go in terms of complete consensus, and second, we can get into this later when we get briefed on financial markets, but I think we’re in a very sensitive time.  My recommendation would be to go very easy on this, and after all, what you say is what people are going to hear, and that’s what they’re going to interpret is our policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is giving his recommendation about how much to say about a certain subject, and there is no opposing view or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 121.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Part of my reason for this was that I anticipate getting asked the question, in which case I would have to respond.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating a reason for a particular action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 122.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to follow up on President Rosengren’s suggestion about replacing “at the same time or relatively soon thereafter” with the word “next.”  I’m sympathetic to the idea that we don’t want to have references to exact times, so I’m happy with that.  But on the other hand, the word “next” does remove the possibility of doing something “at the same time.”  So I would prefer to see something like “at the same time or thereafter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota prefers to use "at the same time or thereafter" instead of "next" because using "next" removes the possibility of doing something "at the same time."


Passage number 123.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Okay. Thank you." expresses a polite acknowledgement or gratitude towards President Hoenig, without presenting any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 124.
 MR. HOENIG.  I don’t mean to be throwing this out loosely, but I know I heard a lot of desires to see all timing taken out.  However, if you want to create chatter, let everyone start guessing as to whether it’s three or four or two years.  This gives them rough guidelines that I think can be helpful.  As you work on the amendments, keep that in mind as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any explicit disagreement or contention. Mr. Hoenig is stating his observation and suggesting a possible approach to keeping people engaged in a conversation. It seems more like a suggestion or advice rather than a conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 125.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Lacker.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 126.
  MR. LACKER.  For what it’s worth, without the timing references, specifically “four to five years“ regarding normalization of our balance sheet, I find myself in President Bullard’s camp of being unable to really support this.   We’ve talked for a while about wanting to normalize our balance sheet, and we’ve talked for a long time about wanting to do that relatively expeditiously, and to me, if all that’s left is the sequence, and I don’t support the sequence, I couldn’t support this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker states that he is unable to support the decision regarding the normalization of the balance sheet because he does not agree with the proposed sequence.


Passage number 127.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Did I understand you correctly to say that your key issue was the “four to five years”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and confirming their understanding of the other person's statement.


Passage number 128.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  It’s a key element.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Lacker agrees with something without providing further context or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 129.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But with that number you’d support it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker would support a certain number.


Passage number 130.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, some definite number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. Lacker agrees with a statement or question. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, we’ll try to get a document that people can support.  If not, we’ll simply report the preponderance of opinion on the issues. Okay.  Thank you very much.  I understand lunch is ready.  Let’s take about half an hour to get lunch and sit down, and then we’ll go into Mr. Sack’s presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the plan of action and scheduling for the presentation.


Passage number 132.
 [Lunch recess] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we reconvene.  We’re at item 3 on the agenda, “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations,” and let me turn it over to Brian Sack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  


Passage number 133.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  The Vice Chairman wanted to say a couple of words on the Maiden Lane II sale.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the Vice Chairman wanted to speak about the Maiden Lane II sale.


Passage number 134.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There has obviously been a lot of press about Maiden Lane II sales, and Maiden Lane II sales have been cited as a factor—in fact, some people would even claim primary factor—for the weakness in the nonprime RMBS market, but also more broadly than that, CMBS and a whole variety of different asset classes.  As Brian said, we feel very strongly that this is not really the main factor.  The deterioration in housing and the decline in risk appetite seem to be much more important.  It’s hard to believe that $15 billion market value of assets could generate such large effects, especially when it’s important to recognize that the nonprime RMBS market is actually shrinking over time because there’s no new issuance.  So this is a market that’s actually amortizing over time. I want to give you briefly an update of where we stand.  The next big event is going to be on July 15, when we actually publish the results.  I’m going to give you a heads up about what those results are going to look like.  The good news is that the sales that we’ve actually done have gone very, very well.  We’ve put out nine bid lists.  We sold $10 billion, face amount, which is roughly one-third of the portfolio.  So we’ve achieved $4.7 billion of actual proceeds, and we’re running about $400 million ahead of our December 31 marks which, if you remember, were the basis of AIG’s bid for this portfolio.  Part of that reflects the fact that we have positive carry on these assets, but a lot of this reflects the fact that the bids we got for these assets were quite a bit higher than our marks.  There’s been no issue in terms of, Do you get bids for the assets, to sell the assets.  We’ve had multiple bids on all of the assets.  We haven’t faced the issue of being left with “cats and dogs” at the end; we can sell everything.  There are bids for everything.  We may not necessarily like the bids that we get, but there’s actually plenty of demand to take these off our hands. The bad news is that there has been, as Brian showed in one of his charts, a significant decline in prices in this market.  As a result, the outlook going forward for prices for the remaining two-thirds of the portfolio is quite a bit less favorable than the prices we’ve actually achieved to date.  If we sold everything that we hold today at the current market prices—instantaneous, no positive carry—we would achieve overall a $1.1 billion profit, which would be smaller than the $1½ billion profit that we would have gotten if we’d accepted AIG’s offer.  What’s our response to this.  Well, our response is we’re going to slow down the pace of sales to reflect the deterioration in market conditions and to reflect the fact that we’re in the summer months where there’s going to be fewer people around.  So you’ll see fewer bid lists from us, and we may also reduce the proportion of securities that we actually sell.  Up to now we’ve sold 75 percent of the securities that we put on offer, and we may be a little less aggressive than that.  Now, in all this, time is our friend.  We have a positive carry as these securities amortize.  If we slow down and prices stay steady, we’ll actually do better than the $1.1 billion.  So that’s where we stand, and I’d be happy to take any questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply providing an update and explaining the current situation.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there any questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question asking if there are any questions. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
 MR. LACKER.  Help me understand this strategy.  Do you place greater value on the upside option, given the occularity about the AIG offer, than the market, or do you think that these are underpriced.  The market prices are going to take into account the carry, right.  So this change in strategy should be present-discounted-value neutral.  So I’m wondering whether you have a different idea than the market about the value or you see a higher value than the market on the upside option, given the appearance and the optics relative to the AIG offer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is questioning whether the market and the person they are speaking to have different ideas about the value of the upside option. They are trying to understand if the person sees a higher value than the market based on the appearance and optics of the AIG offer.


Passage number 137.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Because these are risky assets, there’s a big risk premium on these assets.  So the yield on these assets is actually high relative to a risk-free asset.  With respect to AIG, the issue about not accepting AIG’s offer was not really about the price that they were paying for the assets, it was the fact that we thought that there were significant financial stability issues associated with selling what have obviously been very risky assets all to one entity.  We also were concerned about the lack of a level playing field in the sense that these assets should be available broadly to whoever wants to buy them.  We committed, when we started this process, to basing the rate of sales on market conditions, and market conditions have deteriorated.  We’re also in the summer months where demand is less because there are fewer people at their securities firms.  For those reasons, we’re going to slow down a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing explanations and reasons for why they made a particular decision.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  We can turn to questions for Brian, and if anyone wants to ask Bill another question, that’s fine, too. Brian, let me ask you about the release date on the swap agreements.  Because of the timing of my monetary policy testimony, I believe that there will at least be a serious consideration of releasing the minutes on July 12, and of course, that will contain the information.  That creates a little bit of a concern for me.  Is there any way to move this up.  For example, if we say that Bank of Japan will be considering, when would the next latest possible date be.  What’s your thought on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a speaker asking for information and expressing a concern.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 139.
 MR. SACK.  I didn’t learn that the minutes were going to be accelerated until yesterday.  It’s certainly an option to have the statement come out earlier from everyone except the Bank of Japan, with an indication that the Bank of Japan would be expected to take a similar action.  If so, we can bring it forward at least several days.  I think the Bank of Japan didn’t want it too far in advance of their action, but there’s some flexibility there.  The other thing is, given the timing of their meeting, we would like to release the statement in the morning.  So perhaps we could consider whether a release in the morning ahead of the minutes would still be acceptable.  We’re thinking of a 9:00 a.m. release.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is potential for disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker mentions different options and considerations for releasing a statement and timing it with the Bank of Japan's action. The mention of "flexibility" and considering whether a morning release would be acceptable suggests that there may be different opinions or preferences on these matters.


Passage number 140.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Now we’re open for general questions.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This passage is simply stating that the speaker is now ready to answer any general questions.


Passage number 141.
 MR. FISHER.  On the swap lines, there are no current outstanding balances—is that correct.  And they’ve been minimally utilized, including from Japan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about swap lines not having any current outstanding balances and being minimally utilized, including from Japan.


Passage number 142.
 MR. SACK.  That’s correct.  There was a small amount of activity from Japan over the life of the lines and a larger amount from the ECB, although still relatively small, at the beginning of the lines.  They haven’t been actively used in a while, but yet we continue to think that their presence is a useful backstop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply provides information about the activity on the lines from Japan and the ECB and mentions that their presence is still considered useful.


Passage number 143.
 MR. FISHER.  And they’re open ended in terms of the amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating a fact about the openness of the terms.


Passage number 144.
 MR. SACK.  Yes, they’re open ended, with the exception of the line with the Bank of Canada; the other four are open ended.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage states that the lines are open-ended except for the line with the Bank of Canada. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 145.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I think that’s also a selling point to our critics.  We put them there.  They haven’t been heavily utilized.  The pricing is important.  I don’t know if the timing is right—you asked for approval.  I’d like to move that we approve this, unless we have other discussions on the swap lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and making a suggestion, but they do not express any disagreement or contention with anyone else's opinions or ideas.


Passage number 146.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We’ll vote as soon as the Q&A session is over.  Thank you.  The pricing terms, plus 100 basis points, are intended to keep utilization minimal unless conditions actually are worsening.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions a voting plan and discusses pricing terms.


Passage number 147.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, regarding the debt ceiling, you noted two things.  One, this could be very disruptive if taken to the limit, and, second, that the market has not yet priced that into bond prices.  When do you think the market will begin to react to a lack of resolution if we go right up to August 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Lockhart asking for Brian's opinion on the market's reaction to a lack of resolution regarding the debt ceiling.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 148.
 MR. SACK.  That’s very hard to say.  We’re in a very awkward equilibrium where the markets assume there will be an outcome because not having an outcome would be so catastrophic.  However, that assumption means you don’t see any pressure in markets, and it relieves the pressure on the political process.  And the problem is that the markets may be expecting this to go up to the last minute, so they may be expecting an eleventh hour solution.  I think that means that there’s a chance we won’t see any significant source of pressure in the markets until we’re right against the deadline or so, perhaps late July or very early August.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that there may be disagreement between the markets and the political process regarding the timing and urgency of finding a solution. The markets may be expecting a last-minute solution, while the speaker believes that significant pressure may not be seen until closer to the deadline.


Passage number 149.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "President Plosser" without providing any context or information about his actions or statements. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 150.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I have a question about the reinvestment policy going forward.  The table on exhibit 4, chart 20, shows that the reinvestment strategy has the same maturity structures that we have been doing.  What are the tradeoffs to thinking about changing the maturity distribution, skewing it perhaps more toward short-term securities or Treasury bills.  What’s the thinking about the mixture, the maturity structure of the reinvestments going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question and seeks information about the reinvestment policy going forward.


Passage number 151.
 MR. SACK.  As I noted, this strategy of course will keep the duration of our purchases in that same range of five to six years, which is slightly higher than the duration of the portfolio in total.  Our thinking was that that was a good maturity range to be in.  It isn’t too different from the maturity of the portfolio.  It maintained the current policy and seemed consistent with the idea of policy going on hold, which I think is how many FOMC members have described what the stance of policy will be after June in terms of keeping the balance sheet unchanged.  And we thought that, from a communication perspective, this was also the simplest outcome, to simply maintain that current distribution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing an explanation of a strategy and discussing the reasoning behind it.


Passage number 152.
 MR. PLOSSER.  What would be the consequences, do you think, in the markets of skewing that slightly toward shortening the maturity structure a little bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 153.
 MR. SACK.  In a portfolio-balance type of theory, a shortening of the structure would put a bit of upward pressure on yields.  We tend to think of the portfolio as having the effect through the duration risk it removes, so if we shift toward shorter maturities, we’re removing less duration risk, but it would be quite modest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement and an explanation without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 154.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 155.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, I had two questions related to the debt ceiling.  The first question is about credit default swaps on U.S. debt:  Are their prices showing any movement at all related to concerns about the debt ceiling.  And the second question is, when you talk to market participants, do you perceive any contemplation of some kind of extraordinary unspecified intervention by the Federal Reserve to maintain market function in the wake of hitting the debt ceiling or breaching the debt ceiling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 156.
 MR. SACK.  On the first question, five-year CDS, which is the most liquid part of the structure, has moved up modestly but not dramatically.  The one-year measure, in fact, has moved up noticeably, but we don’t put a lot of weight on that evidence because the CDS market for U.S. sovereign debt is very small.  I think the net outstanding amount from DTC data is something between $4 billion and $5 billion.  So we’re pretty dismissive of that signal.  We would prefer to look at the yields on actual Treasury securities to make inference about the likelihood being priced into the market. In terms of the Federal Reserve’s role and whether market participants are talking about that, I have not heard a lot of discussion about that.  As I noted in my briefing, we’ve begun contingency planning.  We want to make sure that our operations can be conducted in these circumstances.  We’ve also begun a process of thinking about how those operations might affect the market and how that may interact with the debt ceiling; there are a number of issues there.  For example, if we’re buying Treasury securities and there were securities with missed payments, would market participants want to show us large amounts of those securities to get rid of them and not have to deal with the market consequences.  If those particular securities have cheapened a lot, do our existing procedures bias us toward buying them.  Would they have the same incentives to give us those securities in securities lending.  And, last, might there be a substantial need for funding if the repo markets dried up that we would have to meet with repurchase agreements.  We have a list of those kind of issues that we’re working through, but we’re not yet to the point where the market is really focused on that next step.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any overt contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker providing information and discussing the Federal Reserve's contingency planning.


Passage number 157.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage as there is no passage provided to analyze.


Passage number 158.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just to follow up on this, are you approaching that task with a principle in mind that you don’t want our actions at the Desk to blunt the market effects of a nonpayment event.  To some extent, anything we do there is essentially ameliorating the consequence of a fiscal action and implicates us in fiscal action.  I wonder how you’re thinking about that.  I understand that, at the same time there’s a concern about market functioning as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and questioning how the actions of the Desk might be perceived in relation to fiscal actions and market functioning.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 159.
 MR. SACK.  There are some issues that I think are covered under the current directive.  If upward pressure on repo rates were to drag the federal funds rate up as well, the current Desk directive would mandate that the Desk do RPs and inject reserves, so those I’m taking as given.  More broadly, in terms of how the operations may be affected or how the operations could be changed in response to the consequences—that’s an area where I would seek consultation from the Committee.  I’m assuming the Committee does not want to structure operations for the sole purpose of helping the markets through the debt ceiling problems.  If you wanted to go to the extreme, you could imagine operations like CUSIP swaps, where we would buy defaulted securities and sell nondefaulted securities out of our portfolio.  I’m sure there are a number of very creative things we could do to help the markets through a debt ceiling problem.  I’m assuming there’s not an appetite to go to those extremes.  However, there’s a lot of area in between the extremes in terms of how the operations we conduct regularly will be affected, and those are the things we’ll be sorting through.  If we’re doing anything outside of our regular operations or outside of what we see necessary to meet the directive, we would consult with policymakers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker states that they would seek consultation from the Committee regarding how operations may be affected or changed in response to the consequences, indicating a potential disagreement or differing opinions on how to handle the situation.


Passage number 160.
 MR. LACKER.  Do you view a CUSIP swap as beyond the pale.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is a simple question posed by Mr. Lacker to which a response is not given.


Passage number 161.
 MR. SACK.  Yes, absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply agreeing or confirming what was stated previously.


Passage number 162.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  But there would be a securities lending operation, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question, seeking clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 163.
 MR. SACK.  Yes.  The authorization to the Desk for securities lending is in part based on market functioning, so that’s a standing facility that I assume we would maintain.  The authorization for buying and selling Treasury securities, as would be needed for a CUSIP swap, is tied directly to the directive, and the directive does not have a broad market-functioning aspect to it.  I think to design operations for market-functioning purposes that involve buying and selling securities would require some kind of consultation with the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the different authorizations and requirements for securities lending and buying/selling Treasury securities.


Passage number 164.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "President Fisher" does not provide any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 165.
 MR. FISHER.  I just want to make sure I understand this.  We do have contingency plans in place.  So you have some decision-tree analysis here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply indicates that Mr. Fisher wants to clarify his understanding and ensure that there are contingency plans in place.


Passage number 166.
 MR. SACK.  Yes.  We started with a half-page list of potential issues related to the debt ceiling, which has now grown to four pages.  There are a large number of issues we need to think through in terms of how our systems work, how our pricing feeds work, whether the way we do relative value analysis for valuing collateral that comes in or for buying assets outright is affected by all of this—there’s a whole range of issues.  We are working through them.  I wouldn’t say we’ve worked through them completely at this point, but we are now making good progress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply mentions that there are a large number of issues to think through related to the debt ceiling and that they are working through them and making progress.


Passage number 167.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, I would expect you to be doing so, and if it does require coming to the Committee, you’ve said you would but, obviously, first you have to develop all the possibilities.  So thank you for answering that question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses gratitude for the other person's response, indicating a cooperative and agreeable tone.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I guess my thought, Brian, is that you should think about options for preserving market function, and so on, and if we get close to this point, we can obviously have a teleconference and have a decision about which, if any, we want to adopt.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a suggestion or proposal for consideration.


Passage number 169.
 MR. LACKER.  Obviously, you understand the importance of the appearance of maintaining distance from funding a fiscal crisis with our balance sheet.  But back to President Lockhart’s question, it strikes me that August 1 is probably not the time for us to figure it out.  Because market participants have a long history of watching our actions in securities lending and market operations, communicating to them before then our stance regarding this might be useful in order to avoid putting us in a box where we’re forced to act in a way we don’t want to in order to forestall a discontinuity.  I’d urge you to put effort into this as up front as possible and, if consultations with the Committee are needed that those be done earlier rather than later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is just expressing their opinion and urging action to be taken in a timely manner.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m quite confident that if August 2 passes, that there won’t be an immediate default.  I think it would take some time, but there are dates like August 15 where there’s a big coupon payment required that would be much riskier.  But I think end of July would no doubt be sufficient time from the Committee’s point of view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's opinion about the potential consequences of the passing of August 2.


Passage number 171.
 MR. LACKER.  Does the federal government have enough payment-delay options outside of the Treasury redemptions, these weekly notes, to be able to get through to the 15th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question posed by Mr. Lacker.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it does—Bill, you can add to this.  It has a number of unattractive but nonetheless available options, like selling MBS and so on, to raise revenue, and, of course, there’s tax revenue.  If they prioritize and decide not to pay Social Security, for example, which of course is a political disaster, they could still make the principal and interest payments, certainly, for a couple of weeks.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting options and discussing the potential consequences of each option. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 173.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  At the risk of being repetitive as to what President Lacker already said so eloquently, Mr. Chairman, I think it will be important, in advance of any big event in the markets, for us to be clear to the markets about what our stance is.  I think we might be clear within this Committee, but it’s going to be important as well for that clarity to go through to the markets.  Maybe that can be done by late July or early August or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, expresses agreement with President Lacker's point about the importance of clear communication with the markets. However, he also suggests a different timeline for achieving that clarity (late July or early August), indicating a disagreement or differing opinion on the timing.


Passage number 174.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  Then we need to vote to ratify domestic open market operations since the April meeting.  Can I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for a motion to ratify domestic open market operations.


Passage number 175.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "So moved" indicates agreement or approval.


Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  Okay.  President Fisher has moved to approve the extension of the liquidity swap lines.  I would just add that we’ve had a number of calls lately concerning the Greek situation.  There’s a lot that could be happening in the next few weeks there.  Japan seems to be improving, but still there’s some financial risk related to the disaster.  So I think our stance, which is a penalty rate, no current outstanding balances, but providing what could be a very important backstop, is desirable.  Are there any other comments or questions about the swap lines.  Concerns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 177.
  [No response] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  In that case, all in favor, say aye.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.  [No response]  Okay.  Thank you.  Let’s go on now to item 4, the economic and financial situation, and let me turn to Larry Slifman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 178.
 MS. WILSON.  Since the last FOMC meeting, we have had to continually expand the vertical scale of the upper-left chart in exhibit 5, as spreads on Greek sovereign debt over German bunds soared ever higher.  As indicated in the upper-right chart, a year into the IMF–EU program, Greece’s debt-to-GDP ratio remains on an unsustainable trajectory.  The official sector has been struggling with how to finance Greece, given that a return to the markets early next year, as originally envisioned, seems doubtful.  After much Sturm und Drang, EU leaders appear prepared to provide additional funding to help get Greece through the next 12 months, conditional on greater fiscal and privatization measures from Greece.  But with the Greek political situation worsening, there is some uncertainty about whether these measures will be approved in time.  Without the next official-sector disbursement, the Greek government runs out of cash in mid-July. Our working assumption is that Greece manages to secure the funding needed to avert a disorderly default next month.  We also expect that some combination of additional official financing, private-creditor contributions, and Greek government actions will be cobbled together to cover Greece for some time to come.  Eventually, however, more ambitious steps will be needed to make Greece’s debt sustainable—either through significant restructuring of Greek sovereign debt, extended transfers from the euro area, or both.  That process will likely be messy.  But should restructuring occur, we assume sufficient financial backstops will be put in place to prevent contagion from spilling over to Spain, the rest of Europe, and beyond.  We cannot discount the very real possibility, however, of far more disruptive outcomes than in our baseline. In the event that the debt of Greece, or even Ireland, or Portugal—the three most vulnerable economies—is restructured, the direct channels of contagion to the U.S. banking system are likely to be relatively limited.  As seen in the table, U.S. data provided to the BIS show that in December, the direct credit exposure of U.S. banks to Greece was $7 billion, or 1 percent of Tier 1 capital, and to Greece, Ireland, and Portugal combined was 7 percent of Tier 1 capital.  Moreover, exposure to Greece and the other vulnerable countries, including Spain, has fallen notably since March 2010, as seen in the middle-right chart.  Information gleaned from individual U.S. banks provides corroborating evidence that their direct exposure to the three weakest peripheral countries is limited. In contrast, according to the BIS, many “core” European banks, including those in Germany, the United Kingdom, and France, are significantly exposed to peripheral Europe.  And the U.S. financial system, in turn, had credit exposure to banks in core Europe topping $½ trillion in December.  As Dan will discuss shortly, the exposure to Europe of prime U.S. money market mutual funds is especially worrisome.  Therefore, although we believe core Europe has sufficient resources to make up capital losses suffered by its banks as a result of a peripheral crisis, uncertainties about which banks are most affected and how their problems will be resolved could lead to sharp reductions in confidence and disruptions to markets globally, including in the United States. So far, broader indicators of financial stress emanating from the Greek fiscal crisis are more subdued than when tensions flared a year ago, but the sharp swings in the euro–dollar exchange rate (lower-left panel) and the decline in European stock prices (shown to the right) are recent evidence of the ability of the Greek crisis to rattle markets. Heightened fears about Greece and weaker incoming data have created a sense of uncertainty in markets about global growth, discussed in your next exhibit.  As can be seen in the top line of the table, we are forecasting a step-down in foreign growth to 2¾ percent in the second quarter.  Much of this step-down reflects a moderation from the very rapid 4 percent expansion last quarter.  We had already anticipated some of this slowing in the April Tealbook, and our view has been reinforced by first-quarter output data (shown to the right) that generally came in higher than we’d expected.  Thus, we haven’t been too surprised by the weakening in foreign manufacturing PMI data through May (shown in the middle panel), nor by Chinese consumption and lending data (charted to the right) indicating that recent policies are contributing to a moderation in Chinese GDP growth to around 8 percent this quarter. An exception has been Japan, where the economic impact of the March earthquake was felt more quickly and more severely than we had anticipated.  We have built in a larger decline in Japanese activity in the second quarter (line 4 in the table) then we had in April, and this contributes to our estimated step-down in aggregate foreign growth.  However, a normalization in Japanese suppliers’ delivery times and a recovery in real consumption (shown in the middle-left panel) give us confidence that Japan’s economy will snap back in the third quarter, supporting a corresponding revival in foreign growth as a whole.  Nevertheless, in light of developments in the United States, the recent signs of slowing abroad have given us pause, and we will be watching closely for signs of slowing in foreign growth that is more deep seated. Evidence of moderating foreign output growth and the recent turndown in commodity prices, which Trevor will discuss, undergird our forecast of stable or falling inflation abroad, shown in the lower-left panel.  These factors, as well as increased risks surrounding Europe, have contributed to a notable downshift in market expectations of policy rates (as seen in the bottom-right chart).  And we, too, have marked down our policy-rate path for the major economies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily providing information and analysis about the Greek debt crisis and its potential impact on the global economy.


Passage number 179.
 MR. REEVE.  Our forecast for solid growth abroad that Beth Anne just described underpins our favorable outlook for U.S. trade.  As shown in the first panel of exhibit 7, we expect real exports to expand at a robust 9 to 10 percent pace over the projection period, with a good part of this growth reflecting the fall in the dollar since its crisis-related run-up a few years ago. The lower dollar, along with subdued U.S. demand, also provides some restraint to real import growth (the blue line in the first panel).  In addition, imports are held down in the current quarter by disruptions from Japan’s earthquake but then bounce back.  Smoothing through these disruptions, imports expand at a 4½ percent pace this year and next.  With exports outpacing imports, the external sector’s contribution to U.S. GDP growth, shown in the next panel, averages ½ percentage point though next year. As illustrated by the blue bars in the lower-left panel, the recent depreciation of the dollar has also pushed up U.S. import prices.  We see nonfuel import price inflation falling from 7½ percent in the first half of this year to just 1½ percent next year, reflecting slower dollar depreciation and, as shown in the final panel, a projected leveling out of commodity prices. Since April, commodity prices have declined amid heightened concerns about global growth; oil prices were down about $10 per barrel when we finalized the Tealbook and have fallen further since.  Following the repeated upward revisions to our commodity price projections over the past two years, this recent downshift may make our futures-based projection for flat prices seem less far-fetched.  Nonetheless, we recognize (and share) the widespread dismay with how poorly futures predict commodity prices.  Accordingly, the Division of International Finance has been engaged in research to improve our commodity price forecasts.  In the remainder of my remarks, I’ll summarize our key results. The first panel of your next chart shows how futures markets missed the run-up in oil prices from 2003 through 2008 by calling for prices to remain flat.  But, as noted to the right, flat futures curves should not come as a surprise.  Through adjustments in inventories, market participants can arbitrage between spot and futures prices, thus embedding expectations for future supply and demand conditions in current spot prices.  For example, if futures prices are far above spot prices, it will be profitable to buy the commodity in the spot market, store it, and sell it forward in the futures market, thus tending to push spot prices up and futures prices down. There are limits to how far this arbitrage will flatten the futures curve, as the costs and benefits of holding inventories create a wedge between spot and futures prices.  When these costs or benefits are not large, futures curves will tend to be flat.  In other times, such as when inventory levels are very low or very high, futures curves can have a significant tilt.  And in these instances, we find that futures prices do better at forecasting than a random walk. With commodity prices incorporating forward-looking information, the reason futures missed the run-up in prices may be that markets were simply surprised by the evolution of supply and demand.  As shown in the middle-left panel, consensus forecasts of industrial production in emerging Asia—a key source of commodity demand over this period—were indeed revised up in step with the upward shifts in commodity prices.  And forecasts of world oil supply (not shown) tell a similar story of repeated surprises, but to the downside.  More generally, our empirical research confirms that revisions to forecasts of economic growth explain commodity prices better than growth itself. Based on these findings, we’ve devised a new approach for forecasting commodity prices that begins with futures prices but adjusts them to account for the extent to which we think markets will be surprised by the evolution of global growth.  We predict these surprises as the difference between the staff’s forecast for global activity and private-sector forecasts, then map these surprises into prices based on the historical relationship between such surprises and commodity prices.  As we have also found the dollar to be informative for commodity prices, we include dollar surprises in our adjustments as well. The lower panels show a few examples of the predictions this approach would have generated in the past (the dashed lines), along with the forecasts from futures prices for oil and our nonfuel commodity price index.  The new approach delivers a forecast that can vary noticeably from the futures path, sometimes for the better and sometimes for the worse.  Unfortunately, as noted in your next exhibit, this approach does not deliver an improvement in forecasting accuracy.  As shown on the right, its root mean squared error over the past decade is actually a touch worse than a random walk or futures—though the difference is small and not statistically significant. However, our proposed approach has two important advantages.  First, it yields a forecast that is more internally consistent with the staff’s Tealbook forecast.  Second, it helps us to characterize the risks to commodity prices.  For example, in the middle-left panel, the flat forecast of oil prices generated by our new approach (the solid black line) is almost the same as the futures curve used in the June Tealbook forecast (the dashed line).  But in an alternative scenario, where world growth next year exceeds market expectations by ½ percentage point, we would expect oil prices to move up about 15 percent. We plan to implement this new framework on a trial basis starting in the August Tealbook, although we will not blindly adhere to it if problems emerge.  In addition, we intend to continue our quest to better understand—and hopefully predict—commodity prices.  Dan will now continue our presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information and discussing the forecast for U.S. trade and commodity prices.


Passage number 180.
 MR. CARPENTER.5  I’m going to be referring to the package labeled “Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants’ Economic Projections.”  Exhibit 1 depicts the broad contours of your current projections for 2011 through 2013 and over the longer run.  As shown, you expect a gradual economic recovery over the next two and a half years, with real GDP growth—the top panel—little changed this year from its pace in 2010 and then increasing modestly in each of the next two years.  The unemployment rate—the second panel—steps down slowly over the same period.  With regard to inflation—the bottom two panels—the central tendency of your projections for PCE inflation indicates a transitory increase this year before it settles back in 2012 and 2013 to levels roughly consistent with or just slightly below your estimates of its longer-run, mandate-consistent level.  Your projections of core inflation generally remain at or somewhat below 2 percent over the forecast period. Exhibit 2 reports the central tendencies and ranges of your projections for 2011 through 2013 and over the longer run; the corresponding information for your April projections is indicated in italics, and the current and April Tealbook projections are included as memo items.  You generally see somewhat weaker real activity over the forecast period than you did at the time of the April meeting, but your forecasts for inflation have not changed appreciably on balance.  In your forecast narratives, most of you indicated that these revisions were the result of disappointing incoming data on production and spending and elevated energy and food prices. The central tendencies of your longer-run projections—detailed in the column to the right—show that over time, the annual rate of increase in real GDP is expected to  5 The materials used by Mr. Carpenter are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). converge to about 2½ to 2¾ percent, and the unemployment rate will fall to between 5¼ and 5½ percent.  Your longer-run projections for total PCE inflation suggest that most of you see PCE inflation between about 1¾ and 2 percent as consistent with your dual mandate.  All of the longer-run projections were unchanged from April. In the near term, each of you marked down your projections for real GDP growth this year, with the central tendency of your estimates, shown in the top panel, almost ½ percentage point lower than in April.  Most of you now anticipate that real GDP will increase just under 2¾ to 3 percent in 2011, versus just over 3 to 3¼ percent in the previous forecast.  The downward revisions to your GDP growth forecasts for 2012 were of a roughly similar magnitude, with most of you expecting growth next year to be between 3¼ and 3¾ percent compared with expectations of 3½ to 4¼ percent in April.  Your revisions for 2013 were smaller, with most of you still expecting growth in real GDP between 3½ and 4¼ percent in that year.  This pattern of revisions is similar to, but slightly less pronounced than, the changes in the corresponding Tealbook projections since April. Your unemployment rate projections are summarized in the second panel.  Reflecting the increase in the unemployment rate in recent months and your weaker projections for economic growth, all but one of you raised your forecast for the average unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of this year, with the central tendency of your projections running from just over 8½ to almost 9 percent, versus the central tendency of just under 8½ to 8¾ percent in April.  Similarly, most of you now project that the unemployment rate will only fall to 7 to 7½ percent in late 2013, a range that is about ¼ percentage point higher than your previous projections and still well above the roughly 5¼ to 5½ percent central tendency of your estimates of the unemployment rate that would prevail over the longer run in the absence of further shocks (shown in the right-hand column).  The revision to the Tealbook forecast of the unemployment rate over the forecast period was roughly similar. Turning to inflation—the bottom two panels—the central tendency and overall range of your projections for total PCE inflation this year narrowed slightly.  Most of you now anticipate that headline inflation will be between 2¼ and 2½ percent, compared with a central tendency of just over 2 to 2¾ percent in April.  You generally view inflation as likely to subside in coming years, and the central tendencies for both 2012 and 2013 are 1½ to 2 percent.  While the top of these central tendencies—and ranges—has not changed since April, the bottoms of the central tendencies are a bit higher, as fewer of you now anticipate very low inflation rates than at the time of the last SEP.  The central tendencies for 2012 and 2013 are a bit below the central tendency of your estimates of the longer-run, “mandate consistent” inflation rate, shown to the right.  The central tendency of your projections for core PCE inflation for 2011, shown in the bottom panel, has shifted up a touch and now runs from 1½ to 1¾ percent, about ¾ percentage point below headline inflation.  By contrast, the central tendencies of your core inflation projections for 2012 and 2013 are about the same as those for headline inflation, as most of you see the factors boosting headline inflation this year—including higher commodity prices and supply chain disruptions related to the events in Japan—as likely to be largely temporary.  The Tealbook forecasts for both total and core inflation in 2012 and 2013 are in the lower part of the central tendency ranges of your projections. The next exhibit summarizes your assessments of the uncertainty and risks that you attach to your projections.  As indicated in the two panels on the left-hand side, a sizable majority of you continue to judge that the levels of uncertainty associated with your projections for both real GDP and inflation—as well as for the unemployment rate (not shown)—are greater than the average levels that have prevailed over the past 20 years. As shown in the upper-right panel, there has been a noticeable shift in your views about the risks to your GDP growth projections, with a substantial majority of you now seeing the risks as weighted to the downside.  The downside risk to GDP growth that you most frequently mentioned included the persistent weakness in household income and spending, uncertainties about the domestic fiscal outlook, possible spillovers from the European debt situation, and a slowdown in economic activity in emerging economies. Your assessments of the risks attending your inflation projections—shown in the bottom-right panel—have also shifted somewhat, with a majority of you now seeing the risks to the inflation outlook as generally balanced, although several of you continue to see upside risks.  Some of you noted that although you expect the inflationary effects of elevated food and energy prices to abate, these effects could prove to be more persistent.  Others pointed to the risk that monetary policy could remain accommodative for too long, resulting in an undesirable rise in inflation. The last exhibit is an alternative presentation of the ranges and the central tendencies for GDP growth, unemployment, and PCE inflation.  This exhibit presents the same information about these projections as is presented in exhibit 1; however, a fan chart is used to depict the dispersion in views instead of a so-called box-and-whiskers chart.  The Chairman intends to distribute the fan chart, along with the table, shown in exhibit 2, in conjunction with his press conference tomorrow afternoon.  While the fan chart was judged to be more helpful in the context of the press briefing, we plan to continue to use the box-and-whiskers chart for now in the SEP that is published with the minutes. That concludes my prepared remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting information and summarizing the projections of various individuals.


Passage number 181.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  A couple of things.  First, it is still possible to change your projections if you have new information.  It would be very much appreciated it you could do it after the end of this meeting.  There will be staff in the Special Library who can help you do that.  If you can’t do it by today, I implore you to do it by the beginning of the meeting tomorrow morning, because this information will be released on an embargoed basis at 1:30 p.m. tomorrow.  Second, the Conference of Presidents requested that we have an opportunity for those around the table who wanted to make observations or comments about the financial stability situation to do so, and we will do that very shortly.  But let’s first do the Q&A, and then we’ll come back and allow people to make comments about the financial stability issues. Let me start with a question for Trevor about the approach to forecasting commodity prices he described.  You showed no forecasting benefit, but all you’re really doing there is augmenting the futures curve by something which is effectively the difference between your forecast and other people’s forecast.  So I think what you’re basically just saying is that over the sample period that you tested this on, the Tealbook forecasts weren’t noticeably better than private-sector forecasts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information and instructions for changing projections and making comments, as well as asking a question about forecasting.


Passage number 182.
 MR. REEVE.  That is right.  We actually did a little bit better on the dollar than our perception of outside forecasters, which we take to be, basically, a random walk, because through most of that period we were projecting some modest depreciation; but we lost a little bit on global growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that their organization performed slightly better on the dollar than what they expected based on the forecasts of outside experts.


Passage number 183.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But in the memo that you circulated, if I remember correctly, you found that futures curves actually are more informative when they are sloped either up or down.  So an alternative forecasting method would be one that puts a heavier weight on those situations and, otherwise, when it’s flat, uses some other types of information.  Why didn’t you make that forecasting comparison.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is discussing an alternative forecasting method based on the analysis of futures curves.


Passage number 184.
 MR. REEVE.  Well, actually that observation is a big reason that we retained futures as our starting point in the first place.  Alternative approaches that we tried along the way were just relating commodity prices more directly to our expectations of global economic growth and the dollar and any other factors that we could find, disregarding the information in futures.  But we found that you really are throwing away that useful information when you have a material slope to the futures curve.  So this was a way that we wanted to preserve that useful information but then basically just tweak it based a bit on how we view the world evolving a bit differently than maybe outside forecasters do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is explaining a decision and the reasoning behind it.


Passage number 185.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Mine is just a suggestion to take a weighted average of the two types of forecasts and put a heavier weight on futures when they’re far from being flat.  Okay.  Questions for anybody.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a suggestion to take a weighted average of two types of forecasts. The response to the suggestion is "Okay." and then a request for questions. There is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 186.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I have one question on the downgrade risk of Bank of America and Citigroup.  Let’s use Bank of America as an example because it has Merrill Lynch underneath it.  If Bank of America were to lose its A1/P1 status, would that affect its ability to serve as an investment bank.  This may be too detailed—and if so I can take it offline—but are we concerned about the investment bank model under bank holding companies if A1/P1 status is lost.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 187.
 MR. COVITZ.  I think probably yes, but I’m not sure exactly which functions they wouldn’t be able to conduct and which functions they would be able to conduct.  It’s pretty clear that if they no longer have an A1/P1 rating, their ability to support entities—provide liquidity support or credit support—would go away right away.  I think in the past when something like this has happened, and providers of support have been downgraded to tier 2 status, the rating agencies give the structures a little time to actually make that adjustment.  They don’t instantly say, “Okay.  All of these structures are downgraded right away.”  But ultimately they would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is unsure of the specific functions that would be affected by a downgrade, but acknowledges that the ability to provide liquidity support or credit support would be immediately impacted. They also mention the possibility of rating agencies allowing some time for adjustment before downgrading structures.


Passage number 188.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The statement about Governor Tarullo is incomplete and does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 189.
  MR. TARULLO.  Maybe Bill and I could supplement this a little bit, because we have been talking about this a lot in the context of B of A and Citi, but also, to some degree, Morgan Stanley.  And I think, Eric, our best understanding, which Bill may want to supplement, is that in the past, it’s been very hard to conceive of anybody surviving as an investment bank with an A2/P2 rating.  Bank of America may present a somewhat novel experiment, insofar as they’re such a huge retail bank, with a very big liquidity base and lots of deposits and all the rest, which is associated with the investment bank, but it’s by no means clear that that would be the case.  So I think our expectation has been that, at best, it would be a significant challenge for B of A, and probably more than a significant challenge for Citi and Morgan, which is what’s led to all of the planning by Richmond and New York over the course of eight or nine months since this first became a possibility.  Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a conversation between multiple people discussing the challenges and risks faced by certain investment banks. There is no explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 190.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  I think we are worried about it, and I think one of the issues is, what happens to people’s willingness to take that entity as a counterparty.  So it’s not just their own funding, it’s also their transactions in, say, the OTC derivatives markets.  One thing that is very hard to assess here is, what is the damage to the franchise.  And how does that manifest itself over time.  You could have a situation where nothing happened very dramatically on day 1 or day 90, but the franchise of the entity would erode over time.  The bank’s funding costs are also likely to be higher, and that’s also a competitive disadvantage in terms of generating reasonable returns on equity.  All of these things might have a medium- to long-term effect.  I think it’s a little harder to judge from historical experience, though, because usually what happens is, when you get downgraded to A2/P2, you’re on your way to something even worse.  And so you never really know what would happen if they were downgraded to A2/P2, but then their earnings performance subsequently improved.  We just don’t have a lot of examples of that type of survival.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the potential concerns and effects of a downgrade in a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 191.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, may I ask these two gentlemen—in the early ’90s, we had a problem with several banks being downgraded in terms of their commercial paper, including Citi.  They weren’t as reliant on short-term funding back then as they are now, and, of course, the complexity of their business was less so.  But are there any lessons we learned from that experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 192.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There’s a difference between a bank and a bank holding company, and how do you fund the nonbank subsidiaries.  That’s really the key issue, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 193.
 MR. TARULLO.  That’s right.  And the second thing is, I think there was a lesson, Richard, insofar as with all three of these institutions, there’s been a heavy emphasis on liquidity preparation over the course of the past eight or nine months.  The liquidity preparation doesn’t do anything to address the business-model question that Bill was just describing, but it does mitigate the potential for a sudden discontinuous event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating two points without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 194.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a sentence expressing gratitude, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 195.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Questions.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It only provides a statement of a title or position ("President Hoenig") followed by a placeholder ("Questions") that indicates a forthcoming text.


Passage number 196.
 MR. HOENIG.  I have a question on exhibit 2.  It’s around the discussion of why consumer spending is so sluggish, and you compared it with the three past recessions.  I’d be curious, did you track, for example, the ratio of personal debt to disposable income and compare it with those three periods.  Because although you say one-fourth of the mortgages are underwater, I think it could be more than that; it could be just the leverage that the consumer is working off that is slowing consumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Hoenig is asking a question and providing his own thoughts on the topic of consumer spending. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement between the speakers.


Passage number 197.
 MR. SLIFMAN.  I did not actually do that cyclical comparison.  I am going to put that on my to-do list, however, because I think it’s a good point.  But without having the actual facts in front of me, I would suspect that your hypothesis has a lot of plausibility to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the validity of the point made by the other person and expresses their intention to look further into it.


Passage number 198.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no clear answer to this question as the passage does not provide any additional context or information about President Lockhart.


Passage number 199.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Turning to exhibit 6 on the forecasts of the external sector, my question relates to China and perhaps to Japan.  What, notionally, is the confidence interval you have around those forecasts for the second half and next year—the sharp bounceback in Japan, but more importantly, perhaps, the relatively flat and still very strong growth in China.  Put differently, is there any risk of a China slowdown that really does change the global outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question about the confidence interval and potential risk of a China slowdown, but there is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 200.
 MR. REEVE.  There are always risks.  We’re always mindful of them and looking as carefully as we can to find them.  In the case of China, obviously, policymakers there have been trying to engineer a slowdown from unsustainably rapid growth.  So far they seem to have done a pretty good job at doing that.  One of the main indicators for that is that outstanding bank loan chart that is shown in the exhibit.  There were some fears earlier this year when some soft readings were coming in; they were a little bit hard to interpret because of the lunar new year and the strange dip in retail sales and so forth.  But I think a lot of people took confidence from the May readings, which showed investment picking back up and retail sales still expanding at a healthy pace.  House prices, which are a big concern in a lot of cities in China, have essentially stabilized and are not either increasing at really rapid rates or in a freefall.  So far, it seems like the overall pattern of macroeconomic policies that the authorities have undertaken is achieving the type of reduction in the very rapid rates of economic growth that they were looking for.  And, of course, as you noted, that’s our baseline forecast.  There certainly are risks around it.  Some people are worried about power outages later this year and other disruptions that could emerge.  But so far, we actually feel quite positive on the Chinese outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges some potential risks and uncertainties but overall expresses a positive outlook on the Chinese economy.


Passage number 201.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "President Bullard" does not provide any information that suggests contention or disagreement. It merely states the name of a person.


Passage number 202.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Back to exhibit 2 and these charts comparing the recessions of ’73, ’81, and ’07.  I’ve looked at charts like this myself, and my comment is that the ’70s was a really volatile period in the U.S. economy, and the economy behaved very differently after 1984.  It’s true that these are the previous two recessions that are the most severe, but on the other hand, the economy doesn’t seem to have behaved this way for 25 years, so I’m not quite sure that’s the right comparison.  What I try to look at instead is the period coming out of the 2001 recession and the ’90–’91 recession, even though those recessions weren’t as deep.  And there the current recovery looks roughly similar.  Although there are some differences, it does look more similar to those cases.  In this recession there was a huge drop-off, which I would interpret as a bursting of a housing bubble, and then the recovery has been very similar to the last two.  So that gives you a very different perspective on how to think about this recovery as opposed to looking back to the 1970s.  But again, we haven’t really experienced that for 25 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and perspective on how to compare different recessions and recoveries, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument with anyone else.


Passage number 203.
 MR. SLIFMAN.  Obviously, the comparisons you’re talking about are ones where you, in effect, index them from the trough rather than from the peak, and the charts do look different if you were to do that.  It’s all in the eye of the beholder, but it would seem to me that the more relevant comparisons were to start at the peak, so that one could take in the extraordinary depth of this recession.  And it was for that reason, then, that it seemed the right thing to do, to compare it with other deep recessions.  But I grant you that, in some sense, it depends on the question that you are trying to address.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that different comparisons can lead to different interpretations and suggests that the choice of comparison depends on the specific question being addressed. However, there is no explicit disagreement or argument within the passage.


Passage number 204.
 MR. BULLARD.  I’m just saying, from a recovery perspective, I’d welcome a theory of why those recoveries look different in the earlier era than they look in the modern era.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is simply expressing his perspective and openness to a theory explaining the differences in recoveries between earlier and modern eras.


Passage number 205.
 MR. SLIFMAN.  Another thing we did was to look, for example, at the residuals in spending equations at different points in the recovery.  Typically at this point in a recovery, you would expect, for example, that, because of pent-up demand and deferred purchases that occurred during the recession, consumer spending would be higher than one might expect based simply on income and wealth and the usual other kinds of right-hand-side determinants, whereas now it’s just the opposite.  Consumption is far below what might be expected.  The facts that you present are the facts, but in terms of trying to get some purchase on why this recovery just doesn’t seem to be getting any traction, I think that focusing on these problems in the household sector provides some insight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is primarily an explanation of the current state of consumer spending during the recovery.


Passage number 206.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Let me put it a little more strongly.  You’re pining for something that hasn’t happened in a quarter-century.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 207.
 MS. WILSON.  Can I step in.  When we’ve looked at the similar charts to what you’ve looked at for the United States, and we’ve included a broader range of recessions, we found that the results that were shown here hold in terms of the components.  So aggregate GDP, you’re right, shows up more in the middle—this current recovery indexed to the trough looks fairly in the middle of the range.  But Larry’s point about the weakness of consumption—as well as the unemployment rate—still holds true.  The components are where you see differences.  You can tell by looking at Larry’s charts that if you index the trough, investment is actually going to look pretty strong now, but what you’re going to see is incredible weakness in consumption as well as on the labor market side, and of course in housing.  And those results still hold regardless of where you index.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the previous speaker's point about the weakness of consumption and the unemployment rate, and also reinforces the idea that the components of the chart show differences. They mention that investment may look strong now, but there is still weakness in consumption, the labor market, and housing.


Passage number 208.
 MR. BULLARD.  For those of you that are interested, I’ll put out our advertisement.  All of these kinds of charts are plotted on the St. Louis website, not just for the United States, but also for other countries, monthly and quarterly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 209.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s a propos that President Bullard just commented that this recession followed the popping of a housing bubble.  Larry Slifman made a similar comment.  I think there is an important and interesting distinction between whether it was the housing bubble or the housing bubble plus the financial crisis.  We have some evidence on financial crises, but we have also seen housing bubbles around the world that weren’t accompanied by a financial crisis.  I think Australia is one example.  You may not know off the top of your head, but do we have any sense of whether recessions are very deep and recovery is very slow when there are housing bubbles popping but not a serious financial crisis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The author believes that there is an important distinction between the effects of a housing bubble and a housing bubble combined with a financial crisis, while President Bullard and Larry Slifman have made comments suggesting they may believe differently.


Passage number 210.
 MS. WILSON.  What we’ve done is that we’ve taken a series of about 150 episodes and broken them down the way the IMF has broken them down, by various types, so we know something about financial crises and banking crises.  However, there are not a huge number of observations of housing crises, and while it’s very difficult to say, I’m sure that for the housing component itself, you could find a difference.  Comparing banking and financial crises and normal recessions, when you index to the trough, it’s extremely difficult to identify a difference in the pace of recovery.  You do see differences, to some extent, in how deep or how long the recession is.  But on the way up, you don’t see huge differences, in the aggregate, although you see various differences in the components.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is providing information and describing their understanding of the data, but there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 211.
 MR. SLIFMAN.  Could I add one more comment.  This is related to the point that President Hoenig was raising as well, and that is, we have seen in the United States other times when, regionally, there have been sizable declines in house prices.  It happened in California in the early 1990s, for example.  The big difference was that, even though we had sizable declines in house prices, we did not see a spike in households having negative equity because in those days, you had to put 20 percent down.  But when you put zero down and house prices fall, that’s a big change.  I think that’s an important difference between the situation that we faced in the latter half of the past decade and previous periods of past declines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about the difference between past declines in house prices and the situation in the latter half of the past decade. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 212.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to President Fisher.


Passage number 213.
 MR. FISHER.  I have a question for Beth Anne, Mr. Chairman, if I may.  When we went through your exhibit about the bond spreads and so on, I didn’t hear anything about France.  And the reason I mention that is because, in visiting the ECB last March, including with Mr. Trichet, the subject of the French primary deficit came up—that perhaps it is much worse than anybody really knows.  Last Wednesday, which was an interesting day in the marketplace, for the first time I heard, at least from my interlocutors, some concern that this is a shoe that would drop at one point.  So I wondered if you’ve done much work on that, if you have any insight into it, and if not, if you would be kind enough to look at it, because so much of what we have been hearing about Greece is obviously somewhat discounted in the marketplace as it seems to get worse and worse.  But the one thing that would be a total surprise, if it were to occur, would be a surprise coming from the French fiscal situation, particularly given that they’re an anchor country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 214.
 MS. WILSON.  In terms of the fiscal situation, per se, France was running about a 7 percent headline deficit with about a 5.3 percent primary deficit last year and is expected to reduce that to 5.6 on the headline this year and 4.7 next year.  So they are certainly above Germany, which is the star player here, but it doesn’t look particularly disturbing.  We have seen a run-up, just like many other countries, in their government debt, which went from an average of about 60 percent of GDP in the 2000 to 2006 period, and we anticipate will be about 86 percent of GDP—so, obviously rising, but not at a level that would disturb us.  You may have gotten different information than what we have here, but I think what is somewhat disturbing is that France is exposed to the periphery countries, and it has a number of institutions with some high concentration in Greek debt and other peripheral debt.  You’re starting to see spillovers, not necessarily coming from the French fiscal situation itself, but from its exposure to the peripheries.  But I wouldn’t discount the political difficulties they are all facing in terms of bringing deficits down over time.  At this point, we haven’t heard anything, but we will certainly keep our eyes and ears open.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting factual information and providing their own analysis or interpretation without contradicting or disputing any other perspectives.


Passage number 215.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "Thank you" is simply a polite response and does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough context or information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 217.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I just want to make an observation on the discussion following President Bullard’s question, relating that discussion to our DSGE presentation.  You cite low expected income growth as a cause for sluggish consumption growth.  In all those models, though, it’s all together.  You don’t have business and consumer confidence floating around as an exogenous variable.  The economy is on some path, and consumers and businesses are expecting some path, and their income expectations are geared off of that.  So from that point of view, looking at the household sector might lead you to look somewhere else, right.  If their income prospects look poor, then you might peel back the onion.  Maybe it’s hiring prospects that are poor, and for some reason they are not getting hired.  I wonder about your reflections on that sort of perspective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is offering an observation and asking for some reflections on a different perspective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 218.
 MR. SLIFMAN.  When you give a briefing, you have to give things linearly, sequentially.  But obviously these things are all endogenous, and there are interactions among all of them.  I think I tried to stress in my remarks that low expected income interacts with fears about future job loss, concerns about further house price declines, and concerns about geopolitical situations—that all of these things interact with each other to affect short-term spending decisions.  Yes, there is some longer-term spending path that we would expect households to converge to over time, but in the current situation, over the period that’s relevant for us, I think that, for a variety of reasons, households can get thrown off those paths or choose to go off those paths for a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Slifman, argues that short-term spending decisions can be influenced by various factors that interact with each other, such as low expected income, fears about future job loss, concerns about further house price declines, and concerns about geopolitical situations. He suggests that households can deviate from their longer-term spending paths for a while. This contention challenges the idea that spending decisions are linear and sequential.


Passage number 219.
 MR. LACKER.  I was wondering whether some impediment to hiring would necessarily show up as lower consumer spending growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply wondering if there is a connection between hiring impediments and lower consumer spending growth.


Passage number 220.
 MR. SLIFMAN.  Absolutely.  Part of your consumption plan is going to be related to income, which is going to be, of course, related to labor market conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement discussing the relationship between consumption plan and income in relation to labor market conditions.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. 

The phrase "President Kocherlakota" simply states a title or position held by someone, without providing any additional context or information that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 222.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I was going to add to what President Lacker said, that I think there’s a way to put Larry’s comments on the situation in a DSGE framework.  Think about a DSGE model that layers on more heterogeneity among households and maybe has some income uncertainty for households as well.  If you think about those households as facing higher amounts of income uncertainty, possibly because of the impediments to hiring that President Lacker points to, those people are going to be engaging in more precautionary saving to buttress themselves against those risks.  And then that will show up in the form of lower individual consumption, and then aggregate up to lower aggregate consumption.  We live for the day when we have a DSGE model with full and complete markets and that allows for heterogeneity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Kocherlakota is simply adding his perspective to what President Lacker had said previously.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Vice Chairman" is a title or position, and there is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 224.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The chart showed exports above imports.  Are the imports weak relative to our actual growth rate.  In other words, do we think there is import substitution going on.  And if so, how much, and how significant is it.  You can have trade improvement for three reasons:  One, our exports are strong; two, our economic growth is weak; and three, our imports are weak.  But import substitution could be another factor.  We hear a lot of anecdotal reports about the United States getting more competitive relative to China and other places.  I was wondering if that is showing up at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply discussing the possibility of import substitution and questioning whether the United States is becoming more competitive in terms of trade.


Passage number 225.
 MR. REEVE.  Well, the way that shows through in the way we do our projections is really through the exchange rate.  And, certainly, the lower value of the dollar in this projection over time is a restraining force on imports and a supportive force for exports.  In that sense, I think some of that actually is occurring.  But in terms of the question, are imports out of line with domestic demand growth or GDP growth.  Not really.  Our model, which includes U.S. activity and the exchange rate, is doing a pretty good job tracking import growth.  If anything, core non-oil imports are maybe just a touch higher than that model would suggest, but not materially so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 226.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response]  This might be a good time to take a coffee break, and come back at 3:30 p.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The suggestion to take a coffee break and come back at 3:30 p.m. is presented as a possible course of action without any opposing viewpoints or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 228.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The next item on our agenda is billed as a chance for Committee discussion of financial stability issues.  This represents a request from the Conference of Presidents that we have an opportunity for some discussion on this area.  I would like to get to the economic go-round in time to, if at all possible, get through it today.  So I am not encouraging a full go-round on financial stability.  That being said, anyone who would like to make comments, observations, ask questions—I see Nellie Liang is at the table—about  issues related to the financial markets and financial stability, of course, is welcome to do so.  We will solicit your views after the meeting as to whether this format is effective or if there are other ways to do it.  But today, again, we will take comments from whoever would like to speak, and I have on my list here, first, President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing the agenda for a meeting and the opportunity for discussion on financial stability issues.


Passage number 229.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to thank the staff for a very comprehensive overview of financial stability issues and for getting it to us early enough that we could actually digest it for this meeting.  I plan to expand on a theme that has been emphasized already in the briefing materials and has been an area of focus both at the Board and elsewhere in the System; it concerns the continuing risk posed by the structure of money market mutual funds.  Money market mutual funds played a pivotal role in the disruptions to short-term credit markets during the crisis.  During the crisis, a credit loss resulting from Lehman at a non-bank-sponsored prime money market fund caused a run on money market funds more generally and evaporated their demand for short-term credit instruments.  I fear they could play a similar role were European problems to evolve in unexpected ways. Let me be more specific about my concerns.  If one looks at the top-yielding prime money market funds on June 7, their gross yield ranges from 37 to 44 basis points—a very healthy yield for 2a-7 funds that are restricted on both maturity and duration of assets.  However, of these 12 funds, 9 funds yielded a net return of 3 basis points or less for investors.  As a result, taking less risk would not affect the investors who are only receiving 1 to 3 basis points, but would have an effect on the management fees.  Of the 12 high-yielding prime funds, only 1 was sponsored by a bank, and it is 1 of only 2 funds to experience growth year to date among those 12.  The 4 smallest funds experienced double-digit declines in assets under management. How are these prime money market funds obtaining such high gross yields.  In part, it is by taking credit risk, including to European financial institutions.  Let me give just one example.  The highest-gross-yielding fund has taken a large position in Dexia CDs yielding 66 basis points, while the Ambassador Money Market Fund—the only fund to see significant year-to-date growth among these 12—holds a substantial stake in Dexia commercial paper.  Dexia is partly a Belgian and French government-owned bank and has recent five-year credit default swap quotes of 326 basis points, more than double that of Citigroup and Bank of America, who we discussed earlier for possible downgrades.  Dexia has a €4.3 billion direct exposure to Greece and is on credit watch for being downgraded.  Note that money market fund investments are intended to be invested in highly liquid, low-credit-risk assets.  The high credit default swap rates on European banks that are among the assets held by money market funds indicate that many financial market participants view these as having significant credit risk. While the outcome of events in Europe is unclear, it seems that some money market funds are making investment decisions partly based on expectations of European government support, not unlike the assumption that was a problem for the Reserve Fund when Lehman failed without government support.  However, taking credit risk with a promise of a fixed net asset value means that if they are right, they get high management fees, but if they are wrong, they risk another serious disruption to short-term credit markets in the United States.  This may be a particularly acute risk given the examples I provided of funds with exposure to Dexia.  Both of these funds are managed by small, independent asset managers that may not be capable of providing the noncontractual sponsor support that has served as the primary backstop to this industry. What can we do to reduce this financial stability risk.  A group of academics that met at Squam Lake have suggested capital buffers that convert funds to floating-rate NAVs if the capital buffer is breached.  There are a variety of other suggestions, but two and a half years after the run on money market funds, there still has been no agreement.  Given the risk to financial stability, the Federal Reserve should be actively advocating for more progress on this issue.  The Chairman and several Presidents have raised this as an issue publicly.  I would hope that we will strongly encourage the SEC to take action, and, in the absence of a major change, to try to use the FSOC to encourage more aggressive action.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is expressing his concerns about the risk posed by the structure of money market mutual funds, especially in relation to European problems. He suggests potential solutions and hopes that the Federal Reserve will advocate for progress on this issue.


Passage number 230.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, President Rosengren.  I share your concern.  I want you to know that we have in fact worked with the SEC, both in the FSOC as well as through a roundtable they recently held on these issues that Governor Tarullo attended, and I think we have had some effect.  Certainly, Mary Schapiro is very sympathetic to the idea of some of these stronger measures, but we’ll keep monitoring it, and I hope you’ll keep us informed as well.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It indicates agreement and collaboration between the parties involved.


Passage number 231.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  First of all, I want to thank the staff, Dan and Nellie.  I thought that was a terrific presentation that covered a lot of material, and there were some interesting exhibits that presented the information in a way that I hadn’t seen it before.  It was extremely helpful. I want to talk about two issues that I have been talking about for a while, Europe and the federal debt ceiling.  On Europe, let me be very brief.  I suspect that we will avoid a catastrophe in the near term as Greece reluctantly agrees to do more and the private sector participates by rolling over some debt on a “voluntary basis.”  But even if we get this outcome, we should not be very comfortable with where we are.  The intersection of what Greece can or will do, and what the core countries demand—especially from a political perspective—continues to shrink, and we seem very close to a null set.  We might not get to a null set this time, but we are not very far from getting to a null set.  I can easily imagine Greece falling short of its objectives 6 to 12 months down the road, and then we will have another episode, and at that point we actually could reach the end of the road. With respect to the debt ceiling, I would only reinforce Brian’s comments.  We are on a very risky course.  No one knows precisely what will happen if the debt limit is not raised in a timely manner in August, but we do know it will be a mess.  Not only would there be short-term disruptions to financial markets and the macroeconomy, a default, even if temporary, could have a lasting effect on U.S. debt costs and the role of the dollar as a reserve currency.  So I would encourage everyone in this room to raise the alarm in their public comments and in their private discussion of this.  The Chairman spoke about this issue I think quite forcefully recently.  I think the more people that make it clear that this is really serious, the better.  I am particularly worried because the financial markets up to now are so relaxed that the debt limit will be raised in a timely way, and I worry that this is going to give false comfort to those that think a temporary default would not be particularly harmful.  And I think we really need to lean against that notion as hard as we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and then discussing their concerns about two issues, Europe and the federal debt ceiling. They are sharing their thoughts and opinions, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 232.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 233.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I was going to bring this up later, but I think this is an appropriate time to ask a question raised by Vice Chairman Dudley’s remarks.  Even though we will come back together again in early August, is it appropriate to be doing some contingency planning around the early August period, just to know what we would do under various circumstances.  I took Brian’s comments earlier to be that, essentially, he’s clear on operational questions, but if it turned out to be a big deal, it would be back to the Committee to have to decide how to respond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 234.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, either Bill or Brian can add on, but the earlier discussion that Brian led was about contingency planning from the Federal Reserve’s operational point of view, and much of that is mandated by the directive of our normal procedures.  I asked Brian—and I think he is already thinking that way anyway—to consider possible actions that we might take to stabilize markets to the extent we can, with the thinking that if we came close to that time, the Committee would be able to talk about them and see what we were comfortable doing.  So from the Desk’s point of view, I think we have a plan going forward. The other consideration is, we have been strongly discouraged by the Treasury from doing the kind of planning that would involve talking to the private sector.  For example, we have no idea whether the computer systems of BNY, JPMorgan, and the FICC and so on can even manage.  It might be a Y2K type of event in the sense that they don’t contemplate the possibility that they wouldn’t receive principal and interest.  The Treasury’s reasoning is that it doesn’t want to create too much anxiety in markets, and its view is that it intends not to default until it was unavoidable.  You know, we are continuing to talk to the Treasury, and I think at some point we may just have to say, as supervisors and regulators, that we need to do this on our own, and the Treasury doesn’t have to take responsibility for it.  We are, I think, very close to the point where we have to fish or cut bait on those kinds of issues.  So those are the two areas where we are planning.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the discussion of the Treasury discouraging the planning that would involve talking to the private sector. The speaker suggests that they may need to take action on their own, separate from the Treasury.


Passage number 235.
 MR. LACKER.  Just following up on our earlier discussion—I understand the need for stabilizing the market, but at the same time, would it make sense to contemplate a bright-line policy, like “We will not take a defaulted security”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It presents a question or suggestion for discussion without indicating any opposing view or disagreement.


Passage number 236.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that’s something for the Committee to discuss.  We have competing public policy objectives here.  One of them is to avoid Armageddon in the financial market.  We have done some pretty non-bright-line kinds of things in the past to avoid that Armageddon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that there are different public policy objectives and mentioning one specific objective of avoiding Armageddon in the financial market.


Passage number 237.
 MR. LACKER.  I would just point out that the ECB seems to have drawn a pretty bright line, but this is a very different situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a contrasting situation between the ECB and another entity.


Passage number 238.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have some sympathy with what President Lacker is saying.  You don’t want to give comfort to make the debt default more likely.  But at the same time, if a debt default were to occur, you don’t want to make it much worse in terms of the consequences.  You are balancing those two basic issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing understanding and agreement with President Lacker's viewpoint while acknowledging the importance of balancing the two considerations mentioned.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I see no harm in having a list of the options, and then we can make some decisions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their opinion that having a list of options would be helpful, and suggests making decisions based on that list.


Passage number 240.
 MR. SACK.  Yes, I think it would be useful to write out some of the Desk policy issues that could arise in coming weeks and consult with the Committee on approaches they would like to take and where you would like to draw the line.  For example, I would assume we would draw the line past what you just said.  I would think we would probably want to continue to take securities with delayed payments in open market operations.  Excluding them could seem like a very negative market signal about how we were assessing credit quality.  But we could lay all those issues out in a memo and get some guidance from the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. MR. SACK is suggesting that they write out some policy issues and consult with the Committee for their guidance. He also presents his own thoughts on the matter but does not necessarily disagree with anyone else.


Passage number 241.
 MR. LACKER.  This is obvious, but we are facing a couple of decades of fiscal stringency.  If they actually cross this line, our behavior is going to set a profound precedent here.  So the usual time consistency considerations tip the scale a little bit toward a solid contingency plan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact and discussing the potential consequences and considerations for a contingency plan.


Passage number 242.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course.  I would say that I don’t think there is anything we can do within our powers to prevent a default from having extremely negative consequences, if only because of the effect on expectations and the creditworthiness of the U.S. Government.  Whatever we do, I don’t think it’s really a question of us being able to completely eliminate the expectations factor or prevent it from being extremely stressful.  All I can say is, I think we ought to discuss taking into account those expectational effects in what we are prepared to do.  President Hoenig, I have you next.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, the speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting that taking into account the effect on expectations and creditworthiness is important in dealing with a potential default. There is no direct disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 243.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I really thought this was a good report, and the chart show was enormously useful as we think about it, because one of my concerns has been that we have this fairly fragile equilibrium at these very low interest rates.  You can see it come out in different forms.  And I thought President Rosengren’s point about money markets was right on.  I think another area is the repos that are also funding longer-term assets under the guise of short-term liabilities.  It is a problem that I think needs to be addressed. In my region you see it in different ways, as I mentioned before.  Agriculture is still moving very, very much toward leverage as gains are recognized and new opportunities present themselves.  We are seeing it in energy, where there are now huge profits on some of these drilling projects, and they are leveraging that up for incredible turnovers.  I think it’s something we need to pay a lot of attention to, and I know we are.  One element of the ag sector I want to mention once again is the effects of GSEs.  There are two things—what they say and then what they do.  And they are saying they are tightening their standards, but when you look at what the Farm Credit System is doing, it’s something else.  Our commercial banks and ag banks are fairly concentrated in agriculture loans, but still less concentrated than the Farm Credit System, and yet the Farm Credit System is maintaining half the reserve levels as the commercial banks are in that area; it is setting the standard, and it drives you toward the lower common denominator.  So you see the leverage going up, and we are seeing big increases on a quarterly basis now in that sector.  We are seeing big increases associated with energy, and then some leverage deals on energy.  As they search for these returns, we are seeing the financing around money markets on a broader scale than other repos.  This is very helpful, and the use of leverage around this is going to only grow.  How we work our way out of this very fragile equilibrium matters, and that’s why this exit strategy, I think, was so important, that we had that discussion today, and I think it gives us, if you will, a guide for beginning to think forward on how we deal with this.  This is a very good report.  These are things that are emerging that we should pay attention to, and I think it will serve us all well.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the report and highlighting areas of concern regarding low interest rates, money markets, repos, agriculture, and energy. The speaker also emphasizes the importance of having an exit strategy and praises the report.


Passage number 244.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Would anyone else like to comment.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The first two sentences express gratitude and an invitation for additional comments, while the mention of President Fisher does not introduce any conflicting ideas.


Passage number 245.
 MR. FISHER.  On the financial stability, I do want to thank Nellie for her good work and for the work of the 70 people, as I understood your footnote, which were affiliated with it, and for the presentation we just had.  I distinguish between the faucet, which is how we address monetary policy, and the sprinkler system, which is how we water the lawn of the economy.  That is, we either have it distributed properly so that we don’t kill it with inflation, or starve it and destroy it with deflation.  I think this financial stability aspect of it is very, very important.  The transmission mechanism is critical.  And I do want to tip my hat to Governor Tarullo for the work he is doing in terms of “too big to fail,” which to me is one of the major hindrances to the proper conduct of monetary policy—all the work he is doing on capital ratios and other aspects of getting our system right.  I think it is very important that we focus on the shadow banking system and the trip wires that are out there—for example, those that Eric and the staff have pointed out—because it puts us in a very difficult position. One of the risks that I think we need to contemplate and that I worry about is the possibility that we could have a significant selloff in the market.  This wasn’t discussed in terms of financial stability, but having been a market operator, I know these things can happen sometimes inexplicably.  Let’s say that we had a 20 percent selloff in the S&P.  What would we do.  I’m going to switch here from the sprinkler system to what I call the soufflé; soufflés don’t rise twice.  And by that I mean that I’m not sure that we can just pour on more large-scale asset purchases or more quantitative easing.  I think the impact of this, as it goes through time, becomes less and less potent.  I would ask you to consider that as a financial stability risk, in addition to the specifics we have gone through in terms of the specific banks, the short-term funding of those banks, the exposure of money market mutual funds, and also some of the risks that you have in your much longer paper dealing with, say, Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan.  I think this is a very valuable exercise.  I don’t think we can conduct monetary policy without considering how the sprinkler system works and what Rube Goldberg devices are being attached onto it or where the leaks are and what the repair mechanism needs to be.  I think this should be a part of our ongoing discussions.  It is so much better than we had before.  When Governor Warsh was here, he would bring up certain issues, I would bring up issues, others would bring up issues—this is much more systematic.  Again, I want to pat you on the back, Nellie.  And if I could pat 70 other people on the back, I would.  Having an organized discussion here rather than pulling out layers of anecdotal evidence that we can layer on top is very, very important.  So I want that to go down as registered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and support for the work being done by Nellie and her team, as well as acknowledging the importance of financial stability and the need to address potential risks.


Passage number 246.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I agree with you, President Fisher.  I think we are making very good progress, with the intermeeting memos, the operations of the Office of Financial Stability, and these kinds of discussions.  Your comments raised a useful point.  At the beginning you talked about a number of things, like the shadow banking system and so on, which might be amenable to regulatory or microeconomic-type policies.  I think it’s important for us to have enough granularity so that we can decide when the first line of defense is appropriately microeconomic regulation, which gives more cushion to monetary policy to focus on macroeconomic conditions.  But the stock market is an example where microeconomic regulation probably wouldn’t work, and we want to think about that, although I resist any Greenspan–Bernanke put ideas. President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and support for President Fisher's comments and ideas.


Passage number 247.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Now I want to mention some anecdotal evidence, following up on something President Hoenig said.  My banking supervision group and I have heard concerns expressed repeatedly from banks that specialize in ag lending about what they consider weak or lax underwriting practices being used by the Farm Credit System.  Now, the Farm Credit System, when you think about the big banks in the United States, is relatively small—it’s $200 billion in assets—but it owns about one-third of all the farm debt in the United States.  Its failure is an interesting thing to think about, because it wouldn’t be systemic from the point of view of the U.S. economy, but it would certainly be systemic, I believe, in terms of the agricultural sector, which is often viewed as being more significant from a national perspective than its weight in the national income and product accounts would suggest. The Farm Credit System is a government-sponsored enterprise; it raises funds by issuing debt, and that debt is highly rated, probably because it’s a government-sponsored enterprise.  Now, I have to say that we should take into account that our banker contacts who tell us that the Farm Credit System’s underwriting practices are lax are competitors with the Farm Credit System, and their concern should be viewed in that light.  At the same time, the fact that we kept hearing about this means I think that those comments are sufficiently prevalent to warrant further investigation by the Board of Governors, and perhaps by the FSOC.  One thing that’s worth noting is that the FSOC has no representation from the Farm Credit Administration, who is the safety and soundness overseer for the Farm Credit System.  So in some sense, there is no direct way for this to get to the attention of the FSOC.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily the speaker relaying concerns and observations about the Farm Credit System. They acknowledge the potential bias of their sources and express the need for further investigation.


Passage number 248.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nellie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the presence of the actual passage.


Passage number 249.
 MS. LIANG.  This issue has come up.  The FSOC and the Board have had that discussion.  The FDIC is also concerned.  You’re right, the Farm Credit System does have about one-third of the outstanding farm credit debt.  On your point about its failure, it has a huge surplus so that seems not to be an issue.  But we have heard complaints about them causing community banks to loosen their standards.  We have been watching it.  Whether it’s a systemic issue or if it’s just something to point out and have examiners be aware of this issue is still in discussion, but it’s good to hear it being raised again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging the concerns raised about the Farm Credit System but states that it does not seem to be an issue due to its surplus. They also mention that the issue is still being discussed and monitored. Overall, there is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 250.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine the answer without the rest of the passage.


Passage number 251.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I would be interested, Mr. Chairman, from your own perspective, in how the FSOC is working and how that process is going.  Do you have any observations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rosengren is simply expressing his curiosity and asking for the chairman's perspective on the FSOC and its functioning.


Passage number 252.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, as is often the case, all the real work gets done by the staff, and I will ask Nellie to comment in just a second.  [Laughter] We have a meeting only about every eight weeks or so.  We’re doing some important assigned tasks, like developing the criteria for evaluating SIFIs.  We’ve also had some useful interactions:  As I mentioned earlier, I think that the money market mutual fund discussions have moved the SEC’s position and have increased the possibility of a stronger credential system for money market mutual funds.  But because it only meets periodically, it doesn’t have the ongoing working relationships that would be necessary for a truly interactive and effective council.  That being said, of course, we have bilateral relationships with many of the members, and they’ve been quite extensive in the process of Dodd–Frank rulemaking, for example.  Moreover, there are many committees of the FSOC, which are made up of senior staff and even deputy principals in some cases, and my sense is that a lot is happening in those.  Perhaps Nellie could give us her sense of how it is working.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no apparent contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an overview of the work that is being done by the staff and mentioning the interactions and relationships they have with other members of the council.


Passage number 253.
 MS. LIANG.  Yes.  There are about five or six committees that have been set up.  One is the Systemic Risk Committee, and that one is very busy trying to write an annual report, which will be released, we expect, near the end of July.  That’s a key committee that I think is going to form the core of what FSOC will do going forward.  It wasn’t as active over the past year.  Going forward, it’s designed to get staff together to discuss emerging risks they’re seeing.  So you would have the SEC and the CFTC and all of the banking regulators, et cetera, get together and have discussions that will allow issues about risks to bubble.  Then that committee would make decisions about what to bring to the principals for discussion.  In the past year there hasn’t been a lot of discussion because there has been so much work under Dodd–Frank to finish.  There has been a whole slew of studies and proposed rules to write.  As a result, when the principals get together, it’s just all about approving a study or rules, without much opportunity for discussion.  But I think that will change.  One of the two big issues on the table right now that the principals have started to engage in, and the staff has worked quite a bit on, is the designation of the nonbank systemically important institutions.  The FSOC was heavily criticized for not being very transparent about how they were going about this process.  They were going to put out a proposed rule in May and pulled that back, but we’ll put out another document for comment fairly soon.  We are trying put something out to the public that reduces some of the uncertainty about what institutions might be evaluated further for designation.  There is a view out there that the designation could encompass hundreds of firms; because there is just so much uncertainty, there’s an effort to try to reduce some of it. The second piece right now is the annual report.  There will be a couple of sections on topics like:  What does the system look like.  How it has evolved since the financial crisis.  There will be a big section on emerging threats.  It won’t sound too different from what some of you have been hearing lately in terms of what the key threats or the vulnerabilities in the system are, including bank capital, liquidity, money markets, and infrastructure.  And then there are some recommendations that we’re now crafting.  The principals will have to make decisions about which recommendations they would want to include in the annual report and to sign the reports.  That’s what will be going on over the next four to six weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any signs of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 254.
 MR. FISHER.  What’s the time frame.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for the time frame without expressing opposing views or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 255.
 MS. LIANG.  The goal is to release something in late July.  Dodd–Frank’s anniversary is July 21, and something around that time is the goal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is setting a goal to release something in late July, specifically around the time of the Dodd-Frank Act's anniversary.


Passage number 256.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Mr. Fisher, did you have a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The statement is simply asking Mr. Fisher for a comment or opinion.


Passage number 257.
 MR. FISHER.  When you say they’re going to issue suggestions, are these remedies to mitigate the risk or to deal with risk if it occurs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the purpose of the suggestions that will be issued.


Passage number 258.
 MS. LIANG.  For example, if we were to highlight vulnerabilities—the banking system, capital cushions, short-term funding instability, for example—the recommendations could be to continue to pursue money market reforms, which probably is something that the FSOC has come to view as important because they have made a lot of progress on money markets.  On the bank capital, it could be to implement the Dodd–Frank enhanced prudential standards, plus to have the supervisors continue with their CCAR exercises, the internal capital planning processes, something along those lines.  These will all get negotiated over the next few months, but it would tend to be structural, regulatory reform at this point, trying to stay away from fiscal policy and monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different recommendations for addressing vulnerabilities in the banking system.


Passage number 259.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments.  [No response]  All right.  I hope that was helpful, and it is certainly the case that Nellie and many other people have contributed to making financial stability a more explicit part of our policy discussion.  I think it’s only to the good to do that.  All right, we’re ready now for our economic go-round, and I’ll start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the previous comments and expresses gratitude for the contributions made by Nellie and others in making financial stability part of the policy discussion. The speaker also mentions that it is beneficial to include financial stability in the policy discussion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 260.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since our last meeting, my business contacts in New England have turned surprisingly negative.  This negative sentiment particularly pertains to smaller businesses that are not seeing significant increases in demand and are deciding to put off additional hiring or investments until it is clear that we have a more self-sustaining recovery.  When I press these business leaders on the causes for their change in sentiment, they focus on domestic, not international, concerns, and particularly cite that incoming data continue to surprise on the downside, and they do not see what will turn that around.  Unfortunately, I share the disappointment with the incoming data.  For most of this recovery, the Boston forecast, like many other forecasts, has expected that in a couple of quarters, economic growth would pick up.  However, with each additional quarter we keep pushing back when the self-sustaining recovery begins.  Since the beginning of the recovery, we have only grown slightly above potential, and our forecasts have been too optimistic, resulting in serially correlated errors. What accounts for the inability of this recovery to make significant headway in reducing the significant slack in the economy.  First, I think we have underestimated the financial headwinds generated by the financial crisis.  The impaired balance sheet of many consumers and businesses reduces their access to capital and makes them sufficiently risk averse that they are not anxious to take risks even if loans are available.  Second, our housing policies have been unsuccessful.  Housing prices are unlikely to rise as long as there’s a large overhang of vacant and foreclosed homes.  We need policies that return people to sustainable housing situations but quickly remove the inventory of unsold homes.  Housing is one of the sources of serially correlated errors in the forecast, and our research suggests those errors explain a significant fraction of recent forecast errors, a greater fraction than can be explained by housing’s share in GDP or its obvious connection to household durable goods purchases.  Third, more recently we have underestimated the move to more austerity at local, state, and federal levels. What’s my current forecast.  Well, the Boston forecast, once again, foresees an acceleration in economic growth in a couple of quarters.  And while it’s technically a self-sustaining recovery, the growth rates we envision in the out quarters continue to slip lower and lower.  While such acceleration is our best guess, I am becoming less and less confident that we will actually get that outcome, and even with that forecast of accelerating growth, I’m expecting the unemployment rate to remain above 8 percent at the end of 2012. So what about inflation.  The DSGE models presented earlier had inflation in 2013 ranging from 0.3 percent to 1.5 percent.  The Tealbook has inflation measured as core or total PCE at 1.5 percent in 2012.  The Boston inflation forecast is a little below the Tealbook forecast.  Thus, despite some increase in core inflation from extremely low levels, these forecasts all expect us to be well below 2 percent at the end of the forecast period.  I would also note that some of the increase in current measured inflation is related to higher measures of owners’ equivalent rent.  This is striking given that mortgage rates have fallen, housing prices have fallen, and foreclosures remain elevated.  So at a time of increasing affordability for new home buyers, their reticence or inability to purchase new homes has caused a shift to rentals.  I would view this as reflecting more the dysfunction of the current housing market than any significant risk that inflation in the medium term was at risk of breaching my target of 2 percent. If these forecasts are right, we will continue to miss on both elements of our mandate for several more years.  What about the risks to this forecast.  I see significant risks to the downside, but I will focus only on one, the international risk.  While the Europeans may manage a temporary infusion of money for Greece, I am seeing little evidence of significant mitigation of the underlying problem.  The primary deficit remains problematic.  The debt-to-GDP ratio continues to rise, there seems to be limited political tolerance for more austerity in Greece, and the political desire in the rest of Europe to subsidize Greece seems to be ebbing with the passing of time.  Given my modal forecast and assessment of risks, it’s critically important that the economy begin to grow above potential.  Tomorrow I will discuss the implications of this assessment for an appropriate monetary policy that balances all of the risks in the economic recovery.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker is expressing disagreement with the current state of the economy and the effectiveness of certain policies. They mention negative business sentiment, underestimation of financial headwinds and housing policies, and potential downside risks from international issues.


Passage number 261.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude by someone named President Lockhart.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 262.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Overall sentiment of our business contacts and directors in the Sixth District remains positive, but they are not as optimistic as they were before the last FOMC.  Several directors mentioned greater uncertainty around their cautious optimism for the second half.  Few of our contacts cited major changes to their plans for the remainder of the year.  Among the larger contacts we spoke to, the indications of a slowdown were mixed.  Those that expressed disappointment in activity levels cited causes we had heard before:  higher gasoline prices that reduced shopping trips or ate into consumer discretionary spending and supply chain disruptions that affected auto manufacturing.  A large package shipping company headquartered in Atlanta—you can guess who it is—has seen a general slowing of domestic volume year to date.  In contrast, the country’s largest home improvement retailer is seeing very strong traffic in sales volume, to some extent defying broad perceptions of the economy.  Tourism remains quite strong across the region, both international tourists and domestic.  Our New Orleans directors were notably bullish about the energy industry in the Gulf.  They foresee strong activity and job growth in the coming year. We asked a number of contacts about the pass-through of higher input costs.  The atmosphere seems to have shifted from resistance on the part of major buyers to being resigned to some pass-through from suppliers, and a number of contacts across several sectors spoke of having raised prices or having plans to do so soon.  One grocery chain attributed rising fresh-produce costs to higher fuel costs, and I’m hearing similar accounts from business contacts in places I wouldn’t expect.  The distinction between energy and non-energy consumer goods and services that was suggested in the first draft of the policy statement may not be so neat a distinction. Turning to the national outlook in comparison with the Tealbook, the Atlanta Bank’s forecast and the Tealbook are now essentially the same, whereas earlier there was some separation in terms of the overall trajectory, with Atlanta being more pessimistic.  We decided to hold to our basic forecast path of rising economic growth and interpret the recent incoming numbers, particularly the household spending data, as a temporary setback.  Our forecast incorporates a modest second-quarter number, but jumps to a GDP growth number above 3 percent in the third and fourth quarter.  I actually find this an awkward moment to make a call regarding the implications of the recent disappointing data.  I am “tentative” about both the growth and inflation pictures and won’t be holding to my forecast much longer if incoming data continue to disappoint.  I took note in our recent board meetings of concerns expressed by more than one director about the economy simply being on a longer-term weak growth path, say, a 2 percent economy.  Also, as was mentioned earlier in the financial stability discussion, I think the shock risk has risen dramatically with the debt ceiling, Greece, and Europe, and as my question inferred earlier, the potential of a slowdown in China. As regards the balance of risks, I assess the risks to economic growth as heavily, if not exclusively, weighted to the downside.  The alternative scenarios in the Tealbook ably covered the most obvious downside risks.  Regarding inflation, I think there is a reasonable chance that core inflationary pressures play out for longer than I assume as final prices come to reflect the influence of elevated commodity prices.  I don’t expect this to be on a protracted basis, but I’m concerned that such a story might adversely affect inflationary sentiment with uncertain follow-on effects thereafter.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses uncertainty and concern about the economy, particularly in regards to growth and inflation. They also mention concerns about the debt ceiling, Greece, Europe, and a potential slowdown in China. Additionally, they mention that while some sectors are experiencing a slowdown, others are defying perceptions of the economy with strong sales volume. Overall, the speaker's views and concerns present a disagreement or contention with the overall positive sentiment of their business contacts and directors.


Passage number 263.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Pianalto.


Passage number 264.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 265.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy is showing some signs of a slowdown consistent with recent developments in the national economy.  However, the June data, where available, do seem to indicate better business conditions going forward.  Transportation companies in particular reported good business in the first weeks of June.  Large firms remain lean and profitable, with plenty of cash.  They are looking for opportunities to expand to take advantage of the continuing boom in Asia.  The agricultural industry in the District has been slowed by a wet spring, but poor weather has not so far been enough to hamper the outlook for agribusiness income in 2011.  The recent pullback in commodity prices is likely to be helpful for many District businesses, as it means more disposable income for households.  It appears that the recent experience with $4 per gallon gasoline did not significantly dent volumes at a major convenience store retail chain. The District experience with consumer behavior and response to gas prices provides a small piece of evidence that Hamilton is right.  Jim Hamilton, from the University of California–San Diego, has argued over many years that an oil price shock must send the price of oil significantly higher than recently experienced in order to really alter household behavior in a large enough way to send the economy into a prolonged downturn.  And $4 per gallon gas has reduced disposable income for other purchases, to be sure, but does not appear to have caused a wholesale change in household behavior as it did in 2008.  Partly because of this, it seems reasonable to me to look through the recent weakness in U.S. data toward better prospects for the second half of this year. The U.S. economic outlook has been weighed down during the spring because of four global events, any one of which could develop into a significant global macroeconomic shock.  I think none of the four will actually become a shock large enough to put the United States into recession.  However, we have worked our way through only two and one-half of these events.  The events are Japan, oil price increases due to disruptions in supply coming from the Middle East, the European sovereign debt crisis, and the U.S. fiscal situation.  The effects of the disaster in Japan, while more significant than I had originally through, are now fading and are projected to be temporary.  Commodity prices are retreating, as we sit here at this meeting.  Europe is in the process of trying to resolve its way through the latest hurdle, but remains worrying as several, including Vice Chairman Dudley, have commented already.  There are certainly worrying questions about the willingness of Greece to repay under any conditions.  There’s no real longer-term solution on the table.  I think restructuring will eventually be necessary.  I think it can be carried off effectively, but right now it seems quite difficult to do without causing a global crisis or further crisis in Europe.  Despite all this, I think a temporary solution is likely and will push this off to some future date.  On the U.S. fiscal situation, I think a deal is possible and likely, but that event lies a little bit ahead of where we sit today.  All in all, I think this assessment augurs for looking through the current weakness.  The slowdown that we have seen so far in the United States this year does not strike me as being as severe as the one last summer that led to further easing by this Committee. The prognosis for a second-half resurgence and a resolution of remaining key risks requires patience on the part of the Committee.  We will have to wait and see whether stronger data materialize or are confirmed before we can evaluate the situation further.  That puts the Committee in a “wait and see” mode for the time being.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an assessment of the current economic situation and expressing their own opinion and outlook. There are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 266.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Thank you" is simply expressing gratitude and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 267.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude towards President Williams.


Passage number 268.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Answer: No

Explanation: The passage is not presenting any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 269.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage expresses gratitude rather than contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 270.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As widely noted, we’ve hit another soft patch.  The key question is, what are the causes.  Only by understanding the reasons for the soft patch can we gain confidence about its duration and the medium-term trajectory of the economy.  It’s clear that some special temporary factors played a role.  First, the run-up in gasoline prices crimped real disposable income, and this weighed on consumer spending and confidence.  Supply disruptions stemming from the Japanese catastrophe limited motor vehicle output, and may have also depressed demand, as incentives were cut and some popular models were in short supply.  In addition, there is considerable sentiment for the view that the ongoing housing market mess has played a role, with renewed weakness in home prices crimping household wealth and dampening confidence.  And the price declines may have caused prospective home buyers to hold off, even though housing affordability has improved dramatically over the past few years.  Bankers and other business people we talked to also cite regulatory uncertainty, although it’s hard to see why, if this were indeed important, it would bite so abruptly. Regardless of the cause, the weakness of the economy has to be viewed as quite striking at a time when monetary policy is viewed as very stimulative and the healing process following the crisis is evident in a number of areas, including household debt service burdens and credit availability.  I would argue that there is a bit of a puzzle here.  I’d like to suggest that there may be another factor—namely, monetary policy may not be as stimulative as we think it is.  In this regard, I’m not arguing that monetary stimulus is less powerful than normal because of the housing mess or the fact that there are still necessary balance sheet adjustments in train.  I’m making a different argument—that the degree by which monetary policy at a given accommodative setting stimulates real economic activity may diminish over time.  This is not something that we’ve had much experience with, because normally the economy responds quite rapidly to easier monetary conditions.  As a result, this will not show up empirically very clearly in our models or via econometric estimation.  Put simply, we typically don’t stay at very accommodative settings very long, so we don’t have much empirical evidence by which to judge this. Let me explain what I mean in a bit more detail.  Monetary policy at a given setting might provide less lift to the economy over time because either the linkage between the federal funds rate and financial conditions or the linkage between financial conditions and the real economy may weaken over time.  For example, as short-term interest rates stay low, the yield curve will flatten and stock prices will rise, but eventually the yield curve will have a more normal shape and the stimulative effects of monetary policy will peter out.  Japan would be a good example of this.  Similarly, the effects of easier financial conditions on aggregate demand may also diminish over time.  Consider, for example, the prospective homebuyer or car purchaser who responds to a drop in interest rates by moving up the timing of the purchase.  The homebuyer or car purchaser who purchases today will then not purchase tomorrow.  To the extent that monetary policy influences the timing of purchases, its effects will peter out over time. If I am correct that the degree of stimulus at a given rate setting to the economy lessens over time, this has a number of important implications.  First, we might need to increase our degree of accommodation to have the same desired effect as earlier.  Of course, this may not be easy to do at the zero lower bound and with an already enlarged balance sheet.  If we cannot or will not do more, we should expect the recovery to be less robust because monetary policy has lost some of its power.  Second, it implies that exit might need to wait until later because monetary policy will become less stimulative over time just as a natural matter of course.  There may be less reason to exit early because the degree of monetary policy stimulus naturally wears off over time.  Third, early tightening might actually exert considerably more restraint than we anticipate if policy is not providing that much of an impetus to economic growth at present.  We don’t have much experience sitting at the zero lower bound for years, and I hope we won’t repeat this in the future.  That’s why I think we must be open-minded and challenge our assumptions that the current stance of monetary policy is as stimulative as we think it is.  I have encouraged my staff to work on this issue, and I would encourage others to do so as well.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is arguing that the current stance of monetary policy may not be as stimulative as believed, and suggests that the degree by which monetary policy stimulates real economic activity may diminish over time. This challenges the assumption that the current monetary policy is as stimulative as it is thought to be.


Passage number 271.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple thank you message from someone (possibly President Hoenig) to an unknown recipient.


Passage number 272.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, our region has slowed as others have around the May–June time period.  We are seeing some pickup more recently.  Our regional factory activity has decelerated a little more than we thought it would, but it has appeared to stabilize, and we’ve seen some real pickup in our technology industry, especially in the communications sector.  Certainly energy remains strong and agriculture remains strong, with very sizable profits in those sectors. Turning to the national economy, I do expect that the outlook over the next several years is one of moderate growth for GDP.  I think that reflects the fact that we are going through a necessary rebalancing due to both demographics and leverage, as households, especially an entire generation, are saying, “I want to get this debt off my balance sheet.”  And we have a younger generation that had too much and has to get it off the balance sheet, and they’re pulling back.  Businesses are repositioning themselves, and certainly local governments have to get rid of a lot of commitments and a lot of debt.  The federal government is the only exception to that at the moment, and we see what they’re doing with that.  I do, though, expect a resumption of moderate growth.  I think it’s a testament to this economy that, given the amount of leverage we are trying to work our way through, we have seen economic growth at 2½ to 3 percent.  As far as inflation goes, I think it’s inevitable as long as we keep our policy as accommodative as it is.  It will slowly—not rapidly, but slowly—increase, and we will have to watch that as we go forward from here.  In terms of the risks, I think they’re real.  I think we have a very fragile equilibrium.  If you think about how many things we’re worried about that could draw us back into a slowdown, it’s pretty amazing.  And when a situation in a country the size of Greece has the world at risk, we know how fragile this economy of ours is, global and nationally. Solutions are not simple, I realize, and I know that’s a discussion for tomorrow, but I’m not sure that keeping ourselves in this highly accommodative situation indefinitely will do anything but make it more fragile to where something very minor will tip us back, and that’s what we have to be mindful of.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing his perspective on regional and national economic conditions, expressing his belief in moderate growth and the inevitability of inflation. He also acknowledges the risks and fragility of the economy but does not argue against the current accommodative policy.


Passage number 273.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 274.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like the Tealbook, I believe there has been a slowdown of the pace of the recovery since our last meeting, and I think this slowdown has been influenced by temporary factors—factors that will reverse themselves in the months to come.  My forecast for real GDP growth is similar to the Tealbook.  I’m expecting growth to accelerate to close to 3½ percent over the second half of 2011, and I’m expecting growth to be between 3½ and 4 percent over the course of 2012.  My relative optimism is shared by Ninth District business contacts.  We’ll be releasing a midyear business poll in our fedgazette later this month.  That poll shows continued moderate improvement in business conditions in the Ninth District over the past year, with broad-based increases in sales and employment.  Consistent with my national forecast, respondents in our District predict that the next 12 months will be even better.  They indicate, too, that labor markets are relatively slack.  By and large, they are finding that workers are widely available with muted wage pressures, and to put that in context, I should add that unemployment in our District is well under 7 percent.  Firms do expect to expand hiring in the coming 12 months, and that labor markets will tighten slightly. The poll also shows that firms expect to be able to raise prices over the next 12 months.  This finding is consistent with what I see as the national inflation story.  Over the past six months, annualized core PCE inflation was 1½ percent; this is a sharp acceleration of the rate of inflation.  From April to October 2010, annualized PCE core inflation was 0.6 percent.  Such a rapid rate of increase in six-month PCE core inflation has occurred but twice in the past 15 years.  Other more broadly based measures of inflation paint a similar picture.  The trimmed mean PCE inflation calculated by the Dallas Fed was 1.7 percent from October 2010 to April 2011.  The median CPI reported by the Cleveland Fed was 0.9 percent from April to October of 2010 and then rose to 1.9 percent, annualized, from October 2010 to April 2011.  Like the Tealbook, I do expect core PCE inflation to be 1.7 percent over the course of 2011, but unlike the Tealbook, I see core inflation accelerating still further into 2012, and I think this is a symptom of the fact that I see potential output as being lower than the Tealbook does, perhaps for some of the reasons that President Lacker mentioned. The behavior of inflation points to diminution of slack in the economy over the past six months, and I think that the behavior of labor markets also does.  Unemployment has fallen from 9.8 percent in November 2010 to 9.1 percent in May 2011.  Roughly half of this decline is accounted for by people finding jobs.  The employment-to-population ratio has risen—small, but it has risen—by 0.2 percentage point.  The rest of the decline in unemployment is due to people leaving the labor force.  Now, a key question is:  Are the people who departed the labor force waiting on the sidelines to jump back in when conditions improve.  The Bureau of Labor Statistics provides monthly estimates of the number of people who are marginally attached to the labor force—more formally, those who were not currently looking for work but who would like to work and have looked for work in the past 12 months.  That number has fallen by 9 percent over the past half-year.  This is suggestive that many of the recent departures from the labor force will not be temporary.  More generally, as the unemployment rate falls, people find jobs or people decide that they’re no longer available for work, and both of these decisions reduce the pool of available workers for a firm looking to hire.  From the point of view of monetary policy, both kinds of decisions work in the same direction:  They increase wage and inflationary pressures.  That’s why forecasting models tend to use the unemployment rate and not labor force participation as a predictor of future inflation. I fear these recent data are reflective of longer-term uncertainties.  Like most of you, I believe that the unemployment rate will fall back to between 5 and 6 percent by 2016, and in that sense, I do think labor market slack will normalize, but I am highly uncertain about how that reduction will be accomplished.  Will the unemployed find jobs or will they leave the labor force permanently.  The answer to this question is a critical one for the United States economy and for our thinking about monetary policy because it really will shape the longer-run behavior of what we consider to be potential output.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 275.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards President Evans, indicating a positive sentiment.


Passage number 276.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The incoming data clearly show a reduction in the recovery’s already modest momentum.  In particular, the revisions to income, weak jobs and claims numbers in May, and the softness in second-quarter consumer spending throw cold water on my previously more optimistic forecast for a strengthening in aggregate demand.  At this time it’s hard to tell how persistent this weakness will be.  My business contacts say their own businesses are still doing well.  Indeed, several large manufacturers, like Caterpillar and Deere, continue to register very strong sales. Like the Boston outlook, our baseline scenario is that economic growth will inevitably pick up to average about a 3¾ percent pace in the second half of this year and in 2012.  These rates are down three or four tenths from our last projection.  Nevertheless it’s easier to see the downside risks to the forecast than the upside potential.  An important ingredient in my 3½ to 4 percent recovery rate is stronger consumer expenditures.  Such pickup requires more robust job growth to kick spending into a higher gear.  The labor market, though, is a continuing risk.  I only heard a few firms talking about hiring more permanent workers.  My contacts basically repeated their mantra:  Businesses will continue to emphasize productivity gains and keep labor costs flexible.  Translation:  No robust hiring is planned. More generally, uncertainty is substantial.  Businesses have become more concerned about the economic landscape, but things are still only at the worrying stage, so the actual impediment to growth remains small for the moment.  Substantial problems due to a financial distress cascade in Europe are still seen by nonfinancial firms as a vague tail risk.  The U.S. budget debate is also adding to the climate of uncertainty and caution.  To summarize my feelings about economic growth, writing down a forecast of 3¾ percent over the next 18 months continues to be a nice intellectual exercise in the power of positive thinking.  [Laughter] With regard to inflation, I admit that a case can be made that today there is more reason to worry that underlying inflation could be headed higher.  After all, we’ve had the recent increase in core inflation piled on top of the already higher overall index.  But I would like to stop at this point and, in line with President Williams, defend what I’m talking about in terms of underlying inflation.  Recently in the press and other places, it seems like it’s almost a dirty word to mention the core CPI or underlying inflation.  To me, underlying inflation is the component of total inflation that’s persistent and useful for forecasting inflation over the medium term.  I agree that this is a pretty common concept in so many other things that we do for forecasting the real economy, like core orders and things like that.  My view is that the core and median CPI, PCE, and trimmed mean fit this characterization, and they’re very helpful for forecasting inflation. We convened our academic advisory council last week, and many of the participants were uncomfortable with our assessment that inflation expectations remained well anchored, and disconcertingly, even the most ardent efficient marketer among them didn’t think we could rely on financial market data or other such indicators to provide reliable forewarning that inflation was going to take off.  This viewpoint I find maddeningly short on actionable state-contingent triggers.  People just throw up their hands and don’t really help me think about what we should be looking at, no matter how hard I press them. Having noted these inflation worries, the recent higher inflation data have caused most of our inflation models to revise up a bit, but nearly all still generate forecasts for total inflation well below 2 percent in 2013.  Interestingly, the model that focuses most squarely on financial market data, the one that uses the term structure of Treasury interest rates, has a noticeable bump-up in core inflation to 1¾ percent in 2011, but then sees core inflation coming down to 1¼ percent by 2013.  I’m sure that these dynamics would be the same for other measures of underlying inflation, such as the median and trimmed mean measures.  This model builds an overall inflation forecast by adding in expected price changes for food and energy, and that analysis projects total PCE inflation over the medium term will be well below my 2 percent goal.  I just do not see the medium-term risk to inflation as accelerating, as others have mentioned.  Indeed, the model’s 2013 inflation projection is a bit below its previous forecast.  This reflects the decline in nominal interest rates we’ve seen in this period, as well as TIPS breakevens, inflation swaps, and inflation caps.  They all suggest that financial markets are not expecting an outbreak of inflation.  After putting all of our model and anecdotal information together, we submitted a forecast that has both overall and core inflation coming down to about 1½ percent in 2012 and staying there in 2013.  Now, there are upside risks to this inflation forecast, but inflation continues to be below what I think of as our goal, 2 percent over the medium term, and I think that we should be symmetric in our attitudes toward these policy losses.  After all, I think of 2 percent as a goal, not a catastrophe or a ceiling.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker discusses economic data and their own forecast, and also presents their view on inflation. There is no mention of other opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 277.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Thank you very much. President Fisher" is a polite expression of gratitude towards President Fisher, without any indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 278.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I am going to dispense with my usual sunshine report about my Federal Reserve District, if only for fears that the governor of Texas will run around saying we’ve created 3 trillion percent of the jobs—[laughter]—in America, but with one exception.  I want to say that whatever momentum President Pianalto has in her District is solely due to the fact that the Dallas Mavericks trashed LeBron James and the Miami Heat.  [Laughter] Very quickly, Mr. Chairman, what I’m hearing is that liquidity is not an issue.  I have talked about that before; I won’t repeat it.  There is no question that the rate of the recovery has slowed, and I just want to make a few comments on this inflation discussion that we have heard from many of our colleagues.  With regard to the trimmed mean, which, as you know, is our guidepost in terms of the PCE inflation, the fraction of prices declining has come down to 29 percent in the last PCE measurement.  In two of the last three months, the number of components increasing at a rate greater than 2 percent have exceeded 50 percent, and that number has been near 50 percent in three of the last four months.  Having said that, we have seen a rise in the trimmed mean, but over the last 12-month period, and even the 6-month period, we are really still talking about 1½ to 2 percent.  So it has risen from 1, or actually from 0.9. The anecdotal evidence is something of a cognitive dissonance message.  Going back to President Lockhart’s initial intervention, we are hearing from the big-box retailers that they are indeed passing through price increases.  In one particular instance, starting at the end of June, 40 to 50 percent of their entire product line will put through price increases of between 5 and 8 percent.  Dissonance comes from those with alternative business models.  Dollar General, for example, has made it clear it is just going to eat into its margin to buy market share, so there’s a bit of a tug of war taking place.  We are hearing constant concerns about escalating prices in China due to not only wage increases in an effort to push people inland, but also the transportation differentials and the structural changes associated with the infrastructure of moving inland; you are still running at 15 to 18 percent in terms of adjusted labor costs.  The good news is that people are looking elsewhere in terms of changing their supply chains and are doing so rather quickly.  This puts Mexico, by the way, despite its crime problem, in a much better light.  I was reminded at the last meeting that I have to be careful about using anecdotal evidence, but I think it’s not clear yet whether or not these companies will succeed in pushing through these price increases. Yet significant price increases, on the order of 5 to 8 percent, are indeed planned at present on some basic products, ranging from diapers to paper products to essentials.  We’ll have to see what happens, because I think that might affect inflationary expectations. With regard to job creation, one of the things that I am concerned about is the constant effort by businesses to enhance productivity.  This was mentioned earlier, I believe, by President Evans.  Again, they’re using inexpensive money, widely available capital, to continue to drive their productivity—and I know the numbers have come down—to try to do as much work and have as much output in goods and services with the least amount of human labor possible.  So I remain very concerned about job creation in the United States.  And I think this dampening of demand and this slowdown that we have all discussed here may further that process and retard the process of job creation.  I will report one thing I have noticed in my own sampling of anecdotal evidence from the CEOs and have now heard from other people.  For example, Ivan Seidenberg’s last act as the head of the Business Roundtable was to instruct the staff to reduce the estimations of cap-ex and headcount, because what both of us have noticed is that those that operate internationally seem to be much more optimistic about the United States than those that operate solely in the United States.  So I am worried about job creation.  I do note that there’s a tug of war taking place on the price front.  It is driven not simply by commodity prices, and I think that still needs to be resolved.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention between different parties or viewpoints. It primarily consists of the speaker, Mr. Fisher, expressing his observations and concerns about various economic factors such as inflation, job creation, and price increases. There is no evidence of disagreement or conflicting opinions in the passage.


Passage number 279.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses a gesture of gratitude towards Governor Yellen.


Passage number 280.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude to someone referred to as Governor Duke.


Passage number 281.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My first observation is that the commercial banking conditions are not nearly as twitchy as financial markets.  As Governor Yellen noted, financing conditions in the dealer space tightened noticeably in recent weeks.  Reports covering bank credit have followed the same contours for months.  Bankers are still reporting slow but steady progress on credit quality, and all are facing weak loan demand.  It’s hard to judge, but I get the sense that those who are seeing their outstandings increase are the ones who had less significant credit problems originally, and now have less dollars invested in runoff portfolios or are losing less volume to charge-offs. New production seems about the same everywhere at levels one-fourth to one-third of pre-crisis levels.  In areas where there is volume to be had, competition is ferocious.  All banks characterize the competition, in C&I lending especially, as irrational, and they call out each other’s names—particularly at the upper ranges of the middle market.  For quality credit, banks are competing on price, terms, and hold amounts, which is the portion of a credit they will hold in syndicated deals.  Competition for small business and lower-middle-market deals seems a bit more disciplined, at least so far, and several larger banks reported that smaller banks were entering the market for C&I lending as they were being forced out of commercial real estate lending, but they warned that the smaller banks lacked the same level of controls, covenants, infrastructure, and experience in commercial lending that the larger banks have. Auto lending may also be emerging as a battleground.  As you might recall, auto lending was the first product to return to normal.  A few banks talked about increasing focus or entering this market, and another traditional auto lender complained that at any given price point, other banks are buying deeper into the credit pool or lending at higher loan-to-values than has been prudent in the past. All this competition stems from pressure on earnings, as deposits continue to grow and banks have no place to invest the funds.  This became really evident when nearly every CEO, unprompted, told me exactly how much cash he was carrying.  Clearly, the incentive to lend is there, but the demand is not, and banks do not yet have any stomach for easing credit standards to get it.  In addition to the lack of loan demand, the profit dynamics of checking accounts are changing radically, with regulatory restrictions on overdraft fees, higher FDIC insurance costs, interest on commercial accounts, and, of course, the prospect for reduced income from interchange fees. Finally, anxiety levels are quite high about capital and liquidity requirements, stress tests, and regulatory burden.  On the side of displaying confidence in the future, however, unassisted M&A heated up in the last week, with the positions of the fifth-, sixth-, and seventh-largest banks, in terms of deposits, shifting twice in the last week. In reviewing my notes, I started to muse, like Vice Chairman Dudley, and it occurred to me that there are still significant populations of borrowers that have not been able to take advantage of lower rates—or, in the language of the DSGE memo, those who are still facing risk premium shocks.  [Laughter]  So I wonder if we might be able to increase the effectiveness of the actions we have already taken by looking at some ways to reach those who have not yet been able to refinance or restructure at the lower rates.  First, in the mortgage market, as rates fell, those with good credit, income, and equity refinanced, often more than once, but there is still a significant number of performing mortgages with higher coupons that for some reason have not been able to refinance.  We should look at them and try to figure out why.  Second, although we have steadily pressured lenders and servicers to modify residential mortgage loans, when lenders modify commercial real estate loans, including reducing interest rates or even removing interest rate floors, they are labeled as troubled-debt restructures, and the banks who do them are subject to additional examiner pressure.  So we should take a look at the incentives or disincentives to reduce rates on commercial mortgages.  Third, guidance recommending increased risk management as construction and commercial real estate lending approached 100 percent and 300 percent, respectively, of capital are now almost universally regarded as caps.  Banks that are over one or more of the guidelines have reduced CRE loans by more than 11 percent, while those who are comfortably below the guidance have reduced CRE by less than 2 percent.  The population of banks may not be exactly the same, but more than half of the dollar decrease in CRE outstanding over the past year is in portfolios held by banks that are at or close to one of the guidelines.  And while losses have been high in construction lending, they have been significantly lower in loans on existing properties, and lower still on owner-occupied properties.  Revisiting these guidelines and the way they are being enforced, especially the overall CRE limit, could enable some borrowers to refinance commercial properties at lower rates and some small businesses to access more credit.  And it might also allow some smaller banks to lend more in real-estate-secured credits that they understand and less in some of the C&I space that they don’t. And because the theme of this meeting has been models, I would like to challenge the notion of a single representative household making decisions based on rational expectations.  In my experience, most of the households I saw as a banker made spending decisions based on how much money they could put their hands on.  [Laughter]  A lot of that came from debt—from growing credit card balances, home equity loans, cash-out refinances, and using home equity and cash-out refinancing to pay off credit cards and reload for more spending.  In those years, spending grew faster relative to income than we might have expected.  Now that mortgage, home equity, and credit card debt is shrinking and consumer spending is disappointing, it seems likely to me that housing wealth and the ability to tap into it through debt may be more important to consumer spending than investment wealth.  Finally, the inability of a growing number of credit-impaired borrowers, combined with additional regulation on mortgages and credit card products, means that a large population of consumers have no access to credit and can only react to higher food and energy prices by cutting spending on other things.  I guess the model in my head has at least two households:  one that is making rational choices based on preferences and expectations, and another that is just trying to survive using whatever nominal dollars they can put their hands on to buy the things they need.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering observations and suggestions, but does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 282.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  The polite term for those folks is “liquidity constrained.”  [Laughter]  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It consists of a statement and a polite term, followed by laughter.


Passage number 283.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to give my own rendition on a theme on which Eric, Jeff, and Bill have already played variations—and that is, the way in which the gap between what most people, including many of us, expected in terms of the recovery and what has actually happened should affect the intellectual constructs that we are bringing right now in thinking about policy.  If you count this quarter as complete, there have been eight quarters since positive GDP growth reappeared in the middle of 2009.  And of those eight, growth was significantly above trend in only two, 2009:Q4 and 2010:Q1.  These, of course, are the two quarters that probably benefited the most from stimulus spending and, to some degree, probably from relief that a full collapse of the financial system had been averted.  There is only one other quarter with above 3 percent annualized growth, and just barely so.  Of the other five, one was just about at trend, given the central tendency in our forecast, and four of the eight had economic growth well below trend, as reflected in the central tendency.  So this looks to me a lot less like a case of cruising along and occasionally hitting a soft patch than a case of slogging through mud and once or twice hitting a stretch of dry pavement. Similarly, while the supply disruptions caused by the Japanese earthquake are surely transitory, the lower level of defense outlays early this year probably is, and the run-up in commodity prices may be, I recall that some other less-than-robust growth quarters over the past couple of years have also been explained by reference to transitory factors.  The factors in question may well have been transitory, but new negative transitory factors still seem to keep cropping up.  This pattern suggests that the dominant narrative during the past year and a half of a recovery characterized by solid, if unspectacular, growth as the economy recovers from a serious recession may not be the best diagnosis of what has been going on.  And if that’s the case, there are obviously potential implications for policy.  And, in fact, to wrap in the earlier discussion, I think the differences among the DSGE models that Michael was explaining earlier today reflect a lot of this, because, as we saw, the depressing New York Fed DSGE model seems to do best, I think, because it places so much weight on the breakdown of financial intermediation, which is obviously related to what we’ve seen over the past couple of years.  This leads to a search for a better explanation for the past couple of years, one in which I know the Board staff is vigorously engaged right now, and some suggestions about which were offered earlier by Jeff and Bill.  Jeff offered what I might characterize as a neo-declinist explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the gap between expected and actual recovery and suggesting potential implications for policy based on this information.


Passage number 284.
 MR. LACKER.  I thought it was neoclassical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Lacker expressing his belief that something is neoclassical without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 285.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  And Bill offered the explanation that monetary policy has maybe been too timid.  Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure if you want to try the second one out in your press conference tomorrow, but these are two possible explanations.  I think there is a third, which may not be inconsistent with Bill’s—that what made this recession so different from the other two recessions that Larry was talking about is that this is a financially induced recession.  Returning, once again, to the Rogoff–Reinhart theme that I have mentioned so many times before, there is probably some good reason to believe that the effects of a financial crisis that results in a serious recession take substantially longer to work themselves out more fully.  I think when we look at the performance factors that have been consistently overestimated—the house price recovery and PCE, in particular—we see that they may well be linked to the etiology of the crisis itself.  So it does seem as though some emphasis upon the continuing effects of the direct impact of the crisis on housing markets, on the operation of financial intermediaries, and on residential mortgage securitization, and on servicing could accumulate into something that has a continuing drag upon not just household wealth, but also consumer confidence and, as Tom was mentioning earlier, the repair of household balance sheets. I would suggest one other thing, which some people have mentioned a number of times over the past couple of years, and that is the degree to which some secular changes in the economy that were under way before the crisis have maybe been accelerated, and have in turn exacerbated some of the problems associated in particular with job creation.  For instance, if we have had a number of relatively mature industries that were already beginning to restructure, and they lost employees very, very quickly during the recession, and other industries have, understandably, not picked up the slack, you’d have a bigger effect on unemployment.  Another interesting phenomenon of this recession is that, unlike the past several, there has been relatively little creation of new businesses that, in turn, add employment.  There have been lots of new businesses formed, but they are overwhelmingly sole proprietor businesses, which are deemed businesses just because people file a Schedule C.  In terms of new businesses that actually add employees, the performance in the recovery from this recession has been the worst since these numbers were kept.  Other things may be going on with job creation that have been exacerbated by the housing crisis and its aftermath. This is all hypothetical, obviously, just as I know Jeff and Bill were offering hypotheses.  But I do think that there may be implications for policy going forward—and not just retrospective, better explanations for what has happened over the past couple of years.  I will hold those for tomorrow.  But at the very least, I think we all need individually to come to grips with the degree to which our own expectations over the past couple of years have been—maybe for some of you they haven’t—more or less continuously dashed.  We need to find a better explanation, I think, as to why, and thus what we may want to do in the future. Now two other points that have very little, if anything, to do with this theme.  One, regardless of what the right metaphor is, whether it’s cruising along with soft patches or slogging along and hitting a little bit of dry pavement, there is no question but that the economy is particularly vulnerable right now for all the reasons that many of you have mentioned.  Janet talked about the Middle East and North Africa, which is an area that almost fell off of everybody’s radar over the last couple of months, but of course it’s still there, as are a bunch of others that are not front and center.  I think this raises the possibility, to change transportation metaphors, of a stall-speed risk, and thus something else to be watching for.  And then a final point on inflation.  I asked staff and others a bunch of questions about inflation, and I was struck by the fact that they perceived persistent inflation in services.  I am told that the lion’s share of the explanation for that is in rents.  And if that’s the case, that could be another byproduct of a dysfunctional housing market.  I suppose if I’m questioning whether otherwise conventional explanations of transitory factors are actually holding, we should probably watch this as well over the next couple of quarters.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering additional explanations and observations that are not contradictory to what others have said previously.


Passage number 286.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Thank you. Governor Raskin" simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Raskin without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 287.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The moderate pace of the economic recovery continues to be shaken by various forces.  As a result, in the short and medium terms, we seem to be moving further away from our mandates.  And, as we learned from this meeting’s financial stability presentation and memo, financial stability, too, is presenting a key risk.  To my mind, the forces that are shaking us off the moderate growth path are related to declining home values, rising prices, and growing and longer-term unemployment, all of which are weighing on consumer confidence.  Wrangling over the debt ceiling isn’t helping as our lawmakers remain at odds over raising the cap by $2.4 trillion.  The Conference Board shows a dip in the confidence index, even from April.  Americans are more pessimistic about the economy and their income prospects.  Something I had never heard of before I came here, the so-called misery index, which means what it sounds like it means, is on an upward trajectory. As I have noted before, one fulcrum of concern is housing.  Residential construction has subtracted from growth in GDP in four of the seven quarters since June 2009.  That is a contrast with the past three recoveries, when housing added to economic growth for at least a year and a half following the downturns in the 1980s, 1990s, and early 2000s.  Two years ago home prices stopped falling, as low prices, along with homebuyer tax credits, spurred a surge in sales.  Demand then collapsed last summer when those credits expired.  Markets currently don’t have enough buyers to absorb a steady flow of foreclosed properties.  This phenomenon is broad based.  Twelve of the 20 metropolitan areas tracked by Case-Schiller have posted new lows.  Only the Washington, D.C., and Seattle metropolitan areas saw month-to-month growth.  Indeed, the share of mortgage borrowers who have negative housing equity has moved up further in recent quarters to above 25 percent.  This figure translates into about 12 percent of all households.  These falling equity values dent consumer confidence.  They remind homeowners that each month they are making monthly payments on mortgages that exceed the value of their homes; it underscores that the investments in their homes are shaky and not capable of being drawn upon for home improvements, college tuition, or unforeseen medical expenses.  Some of these homeowners will throw back the keys, but even more will attempt a modification in order to try to get some relief from a burdensome monthly payment.  Those who become delinquent will get on the slow train toward foreclosure. This is a train to nowhere, not just for the homeowner, who will soon no longer be a homeowner, but for the bank that holds the mortgage.  The large bank holding companies most actively involved in mortgage-related activities continue to add provisions for repurchase losses.  Repurchase reserves for the four largest bank holding companies now stand at about $11.8 billion, which, even at that staggering amount, is believed by many supervisors to be insufficient.  Foreclosure is also a train to nowhere for the economy, because increased foreclosures are a continued rightward drift in supply, further depressing home prices. One of the big pressures on the demand for housing is the creation of households by younger people.  In a sign of the interconnectedness of the problem of unemployment, many young people—who are suffering more than average from unemployment right now—are doubling up, moving in with friends, with family, and with landlords by necessity, who themselves are struggling to pull together the monthly mortgage payment and are posting extra rooms in their houses on Craigslist to bring in extra cash.  During normal times, about 1.25 million households would be created each year, but that figure now stands at roughly 750,000.  If falling prices cause buyers of all ages to delay purchases, prices will be pushed even lower.  One possible method of halting this rightward shift in supply is to intervene with homeowners before delinquency and move them away from the entry point to the foreclosure pipeline.  Properly structured short sales are one way this could be explored.  In addition, interventions that consist of government purchases of vacant properties in the foreclosure pipeline could also slow a rightward supply shift and a downward demand shift. To sum up, both declining home values and more, and more longer-term, unemployment are weighing on confidence and consumption.  The effects of this dampening seem to be more evident because growth in GDP is not robust enough to mask them.  It’s like the turbulence you feel on an airplane, which is always worrisome, but is all the more worrisome when the plane is flying closer to the ground.  Alternatively understood, the behaviors that are emerging from the intersection of the housing market, unemployment, and confidence impose social costs that are showing up in slow consumption and slow growth in ways that are now unmasked and ways that we are only beginning to understand.  We don’t completely understand these interactions of depressed indicators, but they seem entirely relevant to our assessment of economic conditions and the future path of our economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker discusses various factors that are contributing to the economic downturn, such as declining home values, rising prices, and growing unemployment. They also mention the conflict over raising the debt ceiling and the negative effects it is having on the economy. The speaker argues that these factors are causing a decrease in consumer confidence and dampening economic growth.


Passage number 288.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much, and thanks, everyone, for what I thought was a really interesting discussion.  I’m going to recess the meeting in just a moment, so that we can all go home and take a shower before the British Embassy dinner.  [Laughter]  First, let me just say that tomorrow morning we’ll start with my summary, and then we’ll go into the policy go-round.  We also have a short item with Governor Yellen relating to the external communications policy. Before you leave, make sure you have a copy of the exit strategy statement.  The staff has made some changes based on the discussion we had earlier today.  If time permits—and I certainly don’t guarantee that it will—we could look at it collectively tomorrow at the end of the meeting.  Otherwise, we’ll be in touch with you by long distance just to see whether this is an improvement or not.  Again, at this point, I don’t think we are completely committed to putting this in the minutes, but I think it would be a good outcome, if we can get sufficient agreement.  So take a look overnight, if you have a chance. We’ll start tomorrow at 9:00 a.m., and I’ll see you shortly at dinner.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of administrative announcements and instructions for the next meeting.


Passage number 289.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any questions for Bill.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It includes a statement of thanks and a request for questions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 290.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ve always assumed that this was the time to ask a question about the optimal policy chart that’s in the second part of the Tealbook because we don’t do it at other times.  One thing raised in our discussion of DSGE models yesterday is the possibility of using that type of analysis to do an optimal policy exercise, which we might be more comfortable with.  But until then, we have FRB/US, with which I am also pretty comfortable.  This time I notice that the inflation projection with the funds rate constant is not really different than the counterfactual in which the funds rate is allowed to be negative.  While there doesn’t seem to be much discrepancy in these paths, I will note that the core inflation path is a lot higher than the Tealbook extended forecast.  First, I was curious as to why that’s the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker notes that the inflation projection with a constant funds rate is not different from the counterfactual of a negative funds rate, but mentions that the core inflation path is higher than the Tealbook extended forecast. This suggests a discrepancy or disagreement between the two forecasts.


Passage number 291.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think that the optimal policy run that we do in the Tealbook Book B is coming out in a different place.  If you look at the civilian unemployment rate to the left, at the end of 2012, it’s down around 7 percent, which is pretty low, and inflation, as you say, is up closer to 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their observation about the civilian unemployment rate being low and inflation being around 2 percent.


Passage number 292.
 MR. EVANS.  I think this optimal unemployment rate path is lower than what the extended Tealbook forecast is, right.  Is that what you’re saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans is simply seeking clarification or confirmation of the information being discussed.


Passage number 293.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think that’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that the statement being made is accurate and correct.


Passage number 294.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is that because the Tealbook extension respects the zero lower bound and the optimal control exercise doesn’t.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question asking about the possible reasons behind a certain observation.


Passage number 295.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 296.
 MR. EVANS.  That’s the interesting feature of this particular simulation, it seems to me.  And yet the inflation path is about a quarter to a half a point higher than in the Tealbook and still at about 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact and adds a personal opinion.


Passage number 297.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Dave Reifschneider has a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only states that Dave Reifschneider has a comment, without providing any further information that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 298.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes.  The model is respecting the zero lower bound.  What policy is doing in the optimal control exercise is promising to hold the funds rate lower further out in the future, so that the economy is stronger further out in the future than it is in the Tealbook baseline.  Because the model is run under rational expectations, people recognize the economy will be stronger.  Marginal costs in the future will be stronger, and the labor market will be stronger.  Recognizing that future strength changes their inflation expectations.  That causes upfront inflation to be higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage is describing a model and explaining how it works. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 299.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude for someone's input or assistance.


Passage number 300.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 301.
 MR. FISHER.  Bill, when you say that alternative C would upset the markets, you’re referring to the third paragraph, I presume, and I would be curious if you would be kind enough, from your perspective, to parse the difference between paragraphs 1 and 2 in B and C.  Other than one sentence, which is in alternative C, paragraph 2—“However, the upside risks to inflation have increased somewhat,”—is there really a significant difference between the first two paragraphs of B and C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on the differences between paragraphs 1 and 2 in options B and C.


Passage number 302.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think the end of paragraph 1 is somewhat different as well.  To my ear, the end of paragraph 1 in C expresses a little more concern about inflation by saying, “Inflation has picked up in recent months, as firms are facing cost pressures from increased commodity prices and import prices have risen,” as opposed to the end of alternative B that says “Inflation has picked up in recent months, mainly reflecting higher prices for some commodities and imported goods, as well as the recent supply chain disruptions.”  I think by parsing it that way, it sounds a little bit more like it’s due to temporary factors, at least to my ear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a personal interpretation of the language used in alternative options.


Passage number 303.
 MR. FISHER.  And maybe the difference is that one sentence in alternative C, paragraph 2, “the upside risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker is merely stating a possibility or idea ("maybe the difference is").


Passage number 304.
” MR. ENGLISH.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Yes" is a simple affirmation or agreement.


Passage number 305.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a thank you statement.


Passage number 306.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me say one quick thing, but an important thing.  First, I thank you for your comments on the mock-up statement.  Those were very helpful.  I think the language is better.  As Bill mentioned, following your input, we did not include the projections numbers in the statement.  However, there are a range of issues here that need to be addressed:  To what extent we do refer to targets.  How do we communicate.  That includes inflation objectives, but also what we project in the SEP and a number of other issues related to our communications. I want to thank Janet’s subcommittee for its good work on guidelines on external communication and on the press conference, and we will, of course, be discussing those guidelines shortly.  But given that there are still important unresolved issues relating to our communication of monetary policy, including our projections and so on, I’ve asked Janet to take her subcommittee into a new phase to look at these monetary policy communications issues, including such issues as how we best use our projections.  So Janet has asked President Plosser, President Evans, and Governor Raskin to join her in some further discussions of our policy communication, and I just wanted you to know that that process will continue.  As the process continues, she will solicit your input and, of course, will bring any developments to the full Committee for discussion.   Any questions.  [No response]  If not, let’s begin our go-round, and I see President Lockhart first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mostly a statement of thanks and an update on the progress made in discussing monetary policy communications.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 307.
  MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  As I said in yesterday’s round, I continue to see the most probable path of the economy as expansion at a moderate pace, and I also continue to forecast subdued inflation once the effects of the earlier oil and commodity price increases dissipate.  But I do think we are at a difficult juncture.  The economic data have underperformed.  My outlook, like many, has been marked down moderately, and there are abundant downside risks as well as increased shock vulnerability.  At the same time, the uncertainty around the inflation outlook has increased, and upside inflation risks remain.  I think maintaining the current extent of accommodation will help mitigate some of the downside risks to the outlook. Turning to the statement, the characterization of the economy in alternative B is broadly consistent with my own reading of the current circumstances and outlook.  I do think, however, that the context in which the Committee would be issuing the alternative B language involves heightened and shifting risks, and I note that the draft statement is silent on risks to the outlook.  If the Chairman were not doing a press conference after this meeting, the public would learn three weeks later that the central tendency of the Committee’s forecast has been written down somewhat, and the balance of risks adjusted to a meaningful extent.  Absent the press conference, a disconnect might be perceived between the statement and the later accompanying information.  I think today’s press conference affords the Chairman the opportunity, if you wish or if you get the question, to convey the Committee’s sense of the risk context.  But overall I’m satisfied with the current draft of alternative B, and I suggest no changes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. While Mr. Lockhart supports alternative B and is satisfied with the current draft, he acknowledges that there are abundant downside risks and increased shock vulnerability. He also mentions that the statement is silent on risks to the outlook, indicating a disagreement or contention about the level of risk that should be stated.


Passage number 308.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  But, of course, the actual projections will be released, so the markdown of the forecast for economic growth will be seen.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and acknowledging that the actual projections for economic growth will be released, indicating a future evaluation or confirmation of the forecast. The mention of President Rosengren does not introduce any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 309.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I discussed yesterday, we have been missing on both elements of our mandate for several years.  And according to the Tealbook, the Boston forecast, or the DSGE models in the presentation yesterday, we will be missing for many more.  Economic growth at potential, when inflation is too low and unemployment too high, should not be acceptable.  Unless we begin to see clear evidence of a self-sustaining recovery above and beyond the temporary surge we expect next quarter as disruptions from Japan and energy prices abate, our focus should be on what additional stimulus should be considered at future meetings. Alternative A provides more clarity around the size of our balance sheet and the first increase in short-term interest rates.  Another option would be to reduce the interest rate on excess reserves to zero.  This would provide some marginal incentive for banks to lend.  One of the concerns with eliminating interest on reserves was the effect on money market funds.  Given that money market funds are already placing many of their assets in Europe, and that the possible exit of smaller, less viable money market funds may make financial markets more stable, this option seems more attractive than it once did.  A third option is to lengthen the duration of our security purchases.  Should the economy start growing less than potential with the unemployment rate rising and the inflation rate declining, we would need to consider additional asset purchases.  My hope is that at this time, the forecast of a self-sustaining recovery becomes a reality.  However, if we continue to be disappointed, the longer-term impact of substantial slack and low inflation rates should not be underestimated.  Given the relatively unsupportive fiscal policy we expect, we need to ensure that we are able to fulfill our mandate within an acceptable period of time. In terms of language, I want to follow up on Dennis’s comment.  We don’t publish the balance of risks.  So I think another thing for Janet’s subcommittee to consider is whether the charts on balance of risk might also be something that we would start providing publicly.  I agree with Dennis that the risks to GDP growth did change quite substantially in the charts that were handed out yesterday, and that the charts showed that the risks for inflation have become more balanced.  One way to capture that would be to take the third sentence from paragraph 2 in alternative A, which says, “The Committee perceives that the downside risks to the economic outlook have increased somewhat.”  I think that captures what is embedded in those pictures.  In your press conference you are likely to either be asked or talk about what our exit strategy is.  I think it’s important to balance that with the reality of the downside risks that this Committee sees, and that I think the public at large sees.  It will help emphasize the fact that the purpose of talking about the exit strategy is to say that, when appropriate, we have the tools necessary.  But right now is not the time to be actually employing those tools, because we are concerned about the economic outlook.  So the only change to language would be to take that one sentence and place it in the same spot in alternative B.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their opinion and suggestions, but there is no mention of any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 310.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Bullard.


Passage number 311.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I counsel patience at this juncture.  I think alternative B puts the Committee in a good position to wait and see how the data come in over the summer.  My expectation is that key risks will be resolved in the next weeks and months, and that we’ll see stronger data in the coming months and quarters.  But we are going to have to get confirmation on that before we can make further decisions.  So I think it’s a good point to pause. I just have one other comment.  I have been an advocate of state-contingent policy.  Today we are ending a QE2 program in the midst of a weakening outlook; that puts the Committee and the Chairman in a difficult position.  It would be nice to end a program like this when the data say so and not when the calendar says so.  That’s the key advantage of a state-contingent approach, and I hope we will adopt more of that going forward.  But I think this situation nicely illustrates the dangers of putting calendar dates on things.  If the economy doesn’t cooperate with you, it puts you in a bit of an awkward position.  Not that we can’t handle it, and not that we can’t get through it, but it is a bit awkward.  If we were in a normal interest rate targeting environment, that is what we would do.  We would make adjustments more on a meeting-by-meeting basis in response to events in the economy and not on a calendar basis.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his perspective and providing his opinion on the situation, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else's views.


Passage number 312.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude to President Hoenig.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 313.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The issue, I think, for the U.S. economy is the fact that households and businesses and financial institutions are in the process of deleveraging.  But with adjustments like these under way, the economy grows at a moderate pace, and I doubt that we can stimulate strong growth anytime soon through monetary policy, given the deleveraging that has to take place.  And as much as we would like monetary policy to solve the growth problems in the economy, I think it is beyond its reach.  In my view, accommodative policy generally is appropriate.  I remain convinced that what I think of as excessive accommodation will set conditions for the next set of problems and potentially the next crisis.  Going forward, I think the Committee should consider ways to limit the amount of accommodation that we put in place.  Experience suggests to me that we often react to negative outcomes by easing policy extensively and often.  This easing bias artificially stimulates the economy for a time, as has been noted, and eventually the positive effects of the artificial stimulus fade off.  When the negative effects, such as financial imbalances, emerge, we are forced to engage in even more accommodative policy to combat the ensuing downturn.  In this way, we become enmeshed in what I think of as an unfavorable cycle of easy policies to offset effects of previous easy policies.  And I think it’s a very tenuous way to approach this.  What I’d like to see instead is that we do keep policy accommodative but within boundaries, so that it would not be excessively so.  And I think we’re at a point where using the exit strategy that we’ve worked on can set the context for going forward.  It can address some of what we might call an unstable situation that we have from an extended easy policy that we can’t get out of.  And it would enable us to more gradually bring policy away from this excessive accommodation toward more modest accommodation, and preclude future problems that are years ahead, perhaps, but nevertheless ahead.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, believes that excessive accommodation and easy monetary policies can lead to negative outcomes and potentially the next crisis. However, he also acknowledges the need for some level of accommodation and suggests finding a balance to avoid future problems.


Passage number 314.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "President Williams" does not provide any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 315.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
The passage does not provide any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 316.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  We are experiencing what looks to be a transitory slowdown in growth, and a transitory bulge in inflation.  If I am still allowed to use this word, “underlying” inflation remains moderate, and the recovery should gain strength over time.  Given the sizable slack and the expected decline in inflation, the current very accommodative stance of monetary policy remains entirely appropriate.  Indeed, I would like to echo President Rosengren’s comments:  I worry that 2011 could become a replay of 2010, and we should be thinking ahead to what we would do if the economy stagnates and the risk of sustained deflation reemerges. Finally, I have a comment on the wording of the statement.  In paragraph 3 of alternative B, I’m a little uneasy with the addition of the phrase, “The Committee decided today to maintain the current degree of monetary policy accommodation,” which to me is vague and perhaps misleading.  The special box in Tealbook Book B makes clear that the degree of monetary accommodation—and I am thinking in terms of stimulus—from our large-scale asset purchases is actually declining by the equivalent of about a 25 basis point hike in the funds rate every other quarter, according to our back-of-the-envelope calculations.  This occurs in the Tealbook because the date of the expected future normalization of the balance sheet is drawing near.  I prefer a simpler way to describe policy.  I would delete the phrase about monetary accommodation.  Instead, my suggestion is to begin paragraph 3 with “To promote the ongoing economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee will keep the range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent.”  And then, “It continues to anticipate that economic conditions,” et cetera.  I think this is clearer and, in fact, in a technical sense, more accurate.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Williams, seems to be expressing their support for alternative B and sharing their perspective on the current state of the economy and monetary policy. They also provide a suggestion for the wording of the statement but do not directly oppose or disagree with any specific point.


Passage number 317.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Plosser.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 318.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic recovery has hit another soft patch.  The near-term economic growth is weaker than I anticipated it would be earlier this year.  But so far the recent weak data have not materially changed my view on the path of the recovery in the intermediate term.  I expect both growth to accelerate in the second half of this year and into next year, a bit above trend, and the unemployment rate to go down gradually. I have for some time argued in this Committee that the shocks that have hit our economy in this crisis have had important permanent elements to them.  As a consequence, I have tried to argue that the traditional measures of resource slack may be overstated, and that, in fact, there were limits to the effectiveness of monetary policy to mitigate some of this fall in potential output.  To that end, I support the Chairman’s proposal to begin characterizing our exit strategy in public communications, including the postmeeting press conference and his monetary policy report to the Congress.  I would also encourage us to continue our discussion of explicit inflation objectives as well.  The press briefing and testimony format allow for a fuller discussion of such an objective to help anchor expectations as we exit and to explain how a numerical objective would help fit into the context of our dual mandate.  Explaining the difference between the inflation objective and the unemployment rate, which is something beyond the control of monetary policy in the longer term, is both subtle and not easy.  Trying to do this in the statement would be too difficult, but the postmeeting press conferences and briefings are a way around that. Given the inflation developments and the economic outlook, I am increasingly uncomfortable with the funds rate sitting at zero.  The Taylor rule framework suggests that it is appropriate that we begin to remove accommodation as inflation accelerates and the unemployment rate falls, as forecasted last year.  Moreover, I am concerned that we are allowing imbalances to build up in the financial sector because the interest rates are so low.  I could easily see us simultaneously raising the funds rate by 50 basis points when we stop reinvestment.  In discussing the sequence of steps, we shouldn’t give the impression that large time frames can elapse between our sequencing of events.  We should make sure the public understands that even after we initialize normalization, monetary policy will remain fairly accommodative for some time to come.  To give the Committee more flexibility, and to prepare the public, we need to seriously consider changing the forward guidance and the reinvestment sometime in the next couple of meetings, if the current forecast plays out as anticipated. At this meeting, I can go along with alternative B.  I do have two observations about language.  The sentence in the first paragraph referring to “a loss of momentum in the labor market” strikes me as going somewhat beyond the facts.  I fear that phrases like “loss of momentum” connote to many some indication of a forecast and future path—that is, serial correlation that may or may not turn out to be the case.  The previous sentence in the first paragraph says that the pace of recovery is slow in the first half of the year, and to me that would seem to cover any additional observations we need to make about the labor market.  I’m not sure we need that sentence at all; I would just strike it.  But if that’s unacceptable, I would prefer to simply say in the second sentence, “Recent labor market indicators have been somewhat weaker than anticipated” and drop the word “momentum.” My second observation concerns the language in the last sentence of that paragraph about “longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.”  I raised this issue last time because at least some measures of longer-term expectations, if you look at TIPS over the past 10 months, have actually moved quite a bit, as much as 100 basis points on some measures.  Other measures of longer-term expectations, like the SPF and others, have been more stable, but they have historically been stable.  So I am worried about the connotation of longer-term expectations remaining stable.  I would suggest we replace “have remained stable” with “remain near historical norms.”  That’s all I have, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some contention or disagreement in this passage. The individual speaking, Mr. Plosser, expresses discomfort with the funds rate sitting at zero and suggests that the Committee should begin removing accommodation as inflation accelerates and the unemployment rate falls. He also raises concerns about imbalances building up in the financial sector due to low interest rates. This differs from the views of other members who may hold a different stance on monetary policy.


Passage number 319.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude and mentions the title "President Kocherlakota."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me raise a question about the application of the Taylor principle in the current context.  We can legitimately debate whether the funds rate should be effectively negative in some sense.  But if we take for the moment the premise that, given the weak state of the economy, et cetera, the appropriate funds rate is minus 1 to minus 2, I think it’s pretty clear in the Woodford style of theoretical literature that, as the appropriate funds rate moves up but still remains negative, you wouldn’t respond because of the zero bound.  You may disagree that we are in fact still constrained by the zero lower bound.  But if we are, I’m not quite sure how I see that the Taylor principle would apply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some disagreement in the passage. The author raises the question about the application of the Taylor principle and mentions that there can be a legitimate debate about whether the funds rate should be effectively negative. They also mention that there is a theoretical literature (Woodford style) that suggests that even as the appropriate funds rate moves up but still remains negative, you wouldn't respond because of the zero bound. However, the author acknowledges that there may be disagreement about whether the zero lower bound is still constraining them. Therefore, the passage presents different viewpoints and potential disagreements about the application of the Taylor principle and the zero lower bound.


Passage number 321.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m attempting to apply the Taylor principle to the joint package of accommodation that we have in place so that we are able to, in a sense, lower the fed funds rate below zero through the LSAP.  And so in that sense we’re able to have a policy of minus 2 percent through the stock of longer-term assets that we have.  As time passes, some of the effect of that stock, as President Williams has pointed out, will be reduced, but as inflation rises and slack shrinks, then we should be reducing that joint package of accommodation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their attempt to apply the Taylor principle to the joint package of accommodation that is in place. They are discussing how the policy allows for a "policy of minus 2 percent" through the stock of longer-term assets and how adjustments may need to be made as inflation rises and slack shrinks.


Passage number 322.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Certainly, at some point.  Okay.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 323.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  From a policy perspective, recent developments have raised concerns about the degree of uncertainty and the balance of risks.  As I indicated yesterday in my outlook comments, I believe that we now face the difficult combination of still more uncertainty surrounding the outlook for economic growth and risks that are primarily to the downside for GDP growth and to the upside for inflation.  Under these circumstances, the economy could easily evolve along very different paths that could lead me to support either delaying or pulling forward the launch of our exit strategy.  So I believe this is an appropriate time to watch and wait, and alternative B strikes that right balance for today. Regarding the language, I agree with President Plosser’s suggestion to drop the second sentence in paragraph 1 on the loss of momentum in the labor markets.  One month’s data for me didn’t indicate a change in momentum.  So I would support dropping that sentence.  I think that the changes to the wording around inflation in alternative B will be viewed as another positive step in our effort to improve communication, but like President Plosser, I continue to believe that a useful next step would be to publicly announce an explicit numerical inflation objective with an identified time period.  A more specific time period for the objective could help the statement to be more specific on the inflation outlook when there is considerable uncertainty about when we are going to reach that mandate-consistent level of inflation, and I am pleased to hear that Governor Yellen’s subcommittee will continue to look at ways to improve our language and our communication.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Pianalto expresses her support for alternative B and agrees with President Plosser on dropping a sentence and making changes to the wording around inflation. She also expresses her belief that an explicit numerical inflation objective should be announced.


Passage number 324.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a simple expression of gratitude and includes no conflicting statements or opposing views.


Passage number 325.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I’m going to pick up where President Kocherlakota left off because I agree with his analysis and with his sentiment.  I’m getting increasingly close to alternative C, but I’m going to suggest at this meeting that we should play it up the middle and adopt alternative B.  The reasons for that are manyfold.  One is the weakness that we heard discussed at this meeting, although, like President Pianalto and President Plosser, I would say that one reporting period does not a trend make, and I would change the words as suggested in paragraph 1 and take out the “loss of momentum.”  I’ll come back to that in just a second.  The second reason is because we are in the midst of, I hope, the finalization of a budget/debt ceiling debate.  I’d like to keep the focus on fiscal policy; I don’t want monetary policy to be a distraction.  Third are the developments in Japan and Europe.  And the fourth is what I view as extreme market sensitivity to what we say and what we do at this juncture, despite the discussion we had yesterday and some apparent alleviation of what we detected a little bit last week.  So I would recommend playing it up the middle with alternative B. In terms of the language, I would like to support Presidents Williams’s and Kocherlakota’s suggestion to take out that part of the first sentence in paragraph 3—that is, to have it read, “To promote the ongoing economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee will keep the target range,” et cetera, and Presidents Plosser’s and Pianalto’s suggestion to remove “loss of momentum” in paragraph 1.  I must say that I find paragraphs 1 and 2 in alternative C, even with the conclusion we have in alternative B, to be much more palatable and, in fact, to reflect what I heard discussed yesterday.  I say that with a caveat of somebody who has been married 37 years and is a selective listener.  [Laughter]  But I do think—and Bill, I appreciate very much your including my comment on putting imported goods in the statement—it’s really the result of how firms react, and we did hear discussion, and it is a fact, that firms are reacting by trying to figure out if they can get away with raising costs or not.  While I don’t want to argue the point too hard, I’m much more sympathetic to the first two paragraphs in alternative C. I want to raise one flag of caution, Mr. Chairman.  I think President Williams is correct.  On either side we need to think about what we will do under different scenarios, and I think I understand what Bill is saying, but I’d be extremely careful about the concluding sentence you had in your summary, Mr. Chairman, about greater or extended accommodation that may be needed to achieve the intended effects.  I referenced a soufflé yesterday.  I couldn’t quite hear your response, but you said something about a Bernanke–Greenspan put.  There is an expectation in the market that that is out there.  I think the point that Bill was making—and I tried to make a little bit yesterday—is that the potency of our standard monetary accommodation, large-scale asset purchases, is diminishing over time.  That doesn’t mean we rule out trying to think of other alternatives, and I think that’s a good idea.  And there has even been a suggestion from President Rosengren that we consider other variables—in your case, the interest paid on excess reserves.  I would be very careful about how we state Bill’s point in the minutes.  And, again, I would do as little as possible in this statement and especially in your press conference—go right up the middle of the course, be very bland, and do nothing that upsets the marketplace or tilts the balance one way or another because we’re at a very uncertain point.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the analysis and sentiment of President Kocherlakota and recommends adopting alternative B. The speaker also supports the suggestions made by other presidents regarding the language in the statement. The speaker raises a flag of caution regarding the concluding sentence in the chairman's summary but does not argue against it. Overall, there is a sense of agreement and consensus in the passage.


Passage number 326.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me quickly respond.  My summary, of course, was just trying to incorporate the comment the Vice Chairman made.  I’m not going to introduce speculative views into official communications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is clarifying that their summary was solely meant to include the comment made by the Vice Chairman, and they have no intention of including any speculative views in official communications.


Passage number 327.
 MR. FISHER.  No, but how it’s reflected in the minutes is my point.  And I don’t disagree with Bill, by the way.  Bill and I have talked about this before.  But in terms of how we reflect it in the minutes, I think it’s very, very important.  We’re going to be scrutinized very carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker agrees with Bill in the passage and there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 328.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Of course, the minutes will be up for comment and approval, but I think it would, at most, say one person thought that.  On the Greenspan–Bernanke put, it was a statement of revulsion.  By the way, I don’t think it exists—you would think I would know if it did exist [laughter]—and I would like to discourage that perception.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion and addressing a possible misconception.


Passage number 329.
 MR. FISHER.  And I would encourage you to discourage it.  You can’t come out and say that, but I’m glad to hear you say it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is expressing his agreement and support for the other person's statement.


Passage number 330.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay, thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Okay, thank you" indicates agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 331.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, it’s tempting to say I agree with alternative B, but I will say that I thought Governor Tarullo articulated a very good point yesterday:  This recovery has been marred by sputtering and pauses, and it seems to me that we’ve never achieved escape velocity.  It is reasonable to wait and see today, and so I can support alternative B, but like President Rosengren, I think it is reasonable to consider next steps if we are, again, surprised by economic slowing.  That’s one reason why I was so interested in the FRB/US simulation under the alternative policy.  At first blush I couldn’t figure out why the inflation path was higher than what the extended Tealbook had, but then, of course, it is an optimal policy response.  When I first looked at it, I thought that the policy path was about the same, but, no, upon Dave Reifschneider’s response and looking more carefully, I see that it has more accommodation, and with that additional accommodation what we get from this modeling exercise is 2 percent core PCE inflation.  Well, that’s on target by most of our assessments.  So I thought that was good.  Now, as Dave Reifschneider mentioned, one of the reasons why you get that—and what makes the unemployment rate path better—is that we preannounce, in a rational expectations sense, that policy is going to be accommodative for that extended period of time, which is longer than what we’re saying in the Tealbook extension, and that anticipated accommodation has a benefit for the economy and how it plays out.  So I think that’s something to at least think about as we do this. Our goals are price stability and to support maximum sustainable employment, and monetary policy has been very responsive throughout this downturn to the economy and the financial situation, even though I know there are lots of complaints about how this has proceeded.  But now as things are beginning to change and the risks are more two sided, I think we have to seriously consider what we mean when we say that for inflation we have an objective of about 2 percent.  What do we mean as we begin to flirt with 2 percent.  And I really think that 2 percent should not be viewed as a ceiling and that if we were to breach the target, it would not be a particularly bad outcome.  We have had inflation well below that objective for a long period of time, and I think that, just as we have not been unduly concerned about lower inflation, we should not be predisposed against something perhaps above 2 percent, as long as inflation expectations are reasonable, as long as they’re anchored, and as long as the longer-term and medium-term paths are okay.  In that regard, I think we need to be careful in how we talk about that, and much more clarity would be very helpful.  If we’re confronted with another pause, we would be overly risk averse if we were to simply stand pat.  So I do, like President Rosengren, have sympathies with the way that policy is described in alternative A, where we get the benefits of mentioning that the funds rate could be held low into 2012.  We could very well end up there anyway; we might as well enjoy the benefit of that. In terms of the wording of the statement, I like explicit references to the labor market, our objective as stated, in terms of maximum employment.  It seems to me “loss of momentum” is fairly accurate, and I would prefer leaving that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing his opinions and preferences, but there is no argument or contradiction between different viewpoints.


Passage number 332.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude from someone named President Lacker.


Passage number 333.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I especially support the language we’re using to talk about inflation.  This plain-talk approach is more direct and more likely to be understood by a broader range of American citizens.  It should provide us with a flexible framework for being clear about what we think has actually happened to inflation and what we think will happen to inflation.  I think this will, in turn, encourage us to be more forthcoming about whether we’re satisfied with the inflation outlook, and if we’re not, what we intend to do about it.  All of these things should contribute to stabilizing inflation expectations.  I should note that such benefits are similar to those often ascribed to the adoption of an explicit numerical inflation objective, but I would caution against thinking of our new language as being a substitute for being explicit about our inflation objective.  So I agree with President Pianalto.  I think we ought to strive for greater clarity about our intentions.  That greater clarity would be achieved by taking the step of agreeing on an explicit inflation target, and what we’ve moved toward in the statement about inflation makes it even more important that we take that step.  I think we’re going to have a hard time talking within the new style of language about where inflation ought to go without agreeing among ourselves about where it ought to go. On the language changes that have been proposed so far, some strike me as very good.  I think the changes we made last time were in the nature of avoiding the use of latent variables, and I think of “momentum in the labor market” as one of those.  So I very much support President Plosser’s suggestion that we reword that sentence in terms of observables.  It is, after all, the paragraph that talks about the present and the past, and momentum certainly has a connotation of persistence that you would think doesn’t belong in the paragraph about backward-looking conditions.  Similarly, I support the suggestion of President Williams.  I think that “the current degree of monetary policy accommodation” is a latent variable—you know, I’m not against us using latent variables in our theoretical constructs in our conversation, but I think we ought to be really careful about foisting them on the public.  I don’t think there’s any loss of clarity to adopt his suggestion and just be clear that we’re going to keep the funds rate low and so on.  I think downside risks have increased, but in my mind, that consists of a greater probability that growth is going to be around 3 or 2½ percent for the next couple of years, and I haven’t heard a lot of compelling argumentation around the table that the risk of a downturn has increased a lot.  Now, I recognize what these two-state models give you:  The closer you slip down, the odds of a falldown are higher.  But I think of most of the increase in downside risks as the risk that economic growth is going to be lower on a sustained basis.  This is related to what President Kocherlakota was noting about potential.  One thing that we didn’t really talk about during the DSGE presentation yesterday was that all of those models have the property that potential is determined by stochastic trends.  That’s a technical term, but it means essentially that the trend rate of growth fluctuates over time, and so it can fall to 2 percent.  It is inconsistent with what President Plosser said about the possibility of permanent downward shifts in potential.  The idea that there is gigantic slack is based on essentially the statistical equivalent of this 3 percent line through 140 years of history.  The DSGE models have been formulated to fit the data, and they’ve found that to fit the data, you need to allow the trend and the level of potential to move around in this way.  For anyone who thinks slack is really large, it’s important to be careful about why you believe that.  Think carefully about the basis for that, against the alternatives that seem to fit the data pretty well.  That concludes my comments, and as I said, I support alternative B with those changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and agrees with President Pianalto and President Plosser's suggestions. They also provide additional thoughts and clarifications on various points without expressing any disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 334.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker, I missed part of what you said.  How would a stochastic trend with white-noise innovations be consistent with a constant—basically, 3 percent growth over 140 years.  Wouldn’t you expect to see extended periods of higher economic growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker is questioning President Lacker's statement about a stochastic trend with white-noise innovations being consistent with constant 3 percent growth over 140 years. The speaker is suggesting that extended periods of higher economic growth would be expected in such a scenario, which contradicts President Lacker's statement.


Passage number 335.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, if you look at the deviations from that trend in the postwar era, you see periods of 2, 3, or 4 percent that are away from trend for several years at a time.  So, yes, 140 years is really impressive, but you can be below that for quite a while and still get back to it in time to make the next 140 years at 3 percent.  That’s the point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the trend of deviations from a certain percentage over time.


Passage number 336.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sounds like it is co-integrated or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Sounds like it is co-integrated or something" appears to be an observation or speculation rather than a statement that involves disagreement.


Passage number 337.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states that Mr. Lacker responded with "Yes," but without providing any information about what he is agreeing or disagreeing with, it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 338.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage since it only mentions the name "Governor Yellen" without providing any context or information about potential conflicts or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 339.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The description of the economy appropriately acknowledges the fact that incoming data have been weak, and the labor market appears to have lost momentum.  My own view is that the risks to the outlook have now shifted to the downside as in alternative A, and I would be comfortable including the “downside risks” sentence from A in B as President Rosengren suggested, but I do not think it is absolutely necessary at this point to refer explicitly to downside risks in the statement.  Given my forecast for very moderate output growth over the next few years, a higher path for the unemployment rate, a path for inflation that remains under 2 percent for the entire forecast horizon, and inflation risks that are balanced, I remain very comfortable with our current reinvestment policy and with the “extended period” language.  Like the Tealbook and the markets, I have pushed out my expectation about how long we’re likely to keep our funds rate target near zero during this intermeeting period.  I still think our next move will be toward less, rather than additional, monetary accommodation, but I agree with Presidents Rosengren, Williams, and Evans that we need to do contingency planning, including a consideration of further steps that we might take should the outlook deteriorate more substantially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Yellen is expressing her support for alternative B and discussing her views on the economy and monetary policy. She is also agreeing with other presidents about the need for contingency planning.


Passage number 340.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you. Governor Duke" simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 341.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B and am happy to wait and see how temporary the temporary factors end up being.  I would also support the change in the language suggested by President Williams.  I ran into the same conflict between the Tealbook box and this sentence.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 342.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You’re referring to the “maintain the current degree of monetary policy accommodation”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply refers to the need to maintain the current degree of monetary policy accommodation.


Passage number 343.
 MS. DUKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The word "Yes" suggests that there is contention or disagreement in the passage, but without any context or further information, it is unclear what specifically is being disputed or disagreed upon.


Passage number 344.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 345.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like everyone else, I support alternative B.  Again, I’m slightly uncomfortable with the language of B because it’s a bit more optimistic than I would be.  But as I reread it, there’s no denotation with which I disagree; I think it’s just some of the connotations.  In the interest of trying to get to agreement here in a timely fashion, I don’t think I’ll suggest any language changes.  I would be opposed to removing the reference to the labor market, although I’m sympathetic to the point that Jeff made, that it wasn’t, strictly speaking, backward looking.  I also support John’s suggestion to remove “maintain the current degree of monetary policy accommodation.”  I wasn’t going to say anything about inflation targeting, but I think I am now.  When I came here, I was quite open minded on the subject of inflation targeting, but I have to say, the more I listen to some of you, the more I’m afraid I read this proposal as an effort to rewrite the Federal Reserve Act and to remove part of the dual mandate.  I guess I should say, for the record now, that I’m now drifting toward opposition to any inflation target.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker mentions being slightly uncomfortable with the language of alternative B, but does not express any disagreement with its content. They also mention being sympathetic to a point made by Jeff, indicating a willingness to consider different viewpoints.


Passage number 346.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any elements of contention or disagreement. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude addressed to Governor Raskin.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 347.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the outlook described in alternative B out of an abundance of hope that the serious downside risks to economic growth do not materialize.  I also support the policy prescription in alternative B. However the economic books and posterity judge the effects of this Committee’s historic purchases of $600 billion of Treasury securities, one legacy of the large-scale asset program that both the advocates and the critics agree on is that this program took place against a backdrop of weak macroeconomic data in the United States; suboptimal fiscal policy; modest, at best, growth in gross domestic product; high joblessness; and a flat housing market.  Part of the rationale for the LSAP was that it would stimulate, or at least counteract, slow economic growth through the transmission effects of low interest rates.  However, when the LSAP began last November, there followed a rigorous bout of Treasury selling, sending yields sharply higher.  Predictably, rates then moved down, after peaking at 3.77 percent in February.  Rates on benchmark 10-year notes are now back below 3 percent, compared with 2.48 percent before the start of purchases.  Where rates would have been in the absence of the LSAP is questionable.  But regardless of whether, in the absence of LSAP, rates would have been higher and deflationary pressures would have taken hold, we do know that lower interest rates have not translated into vastly accelerated business investment or momentous consumption.  From this perspective, the argument for more QE of a similar size and composition is questionable.  Some argue that the LSAP was too modest, but even if it was right-sized for the economy as we saw it then, it seems to me that identical monetary policy accommodation that would be aimed directly at interest rates on Treasuries and mortgage rates may not be the prescription for today’s problems.  Instead, I think a different response should now be considered that addresses with precision the portions of the economy that are clogged. What does such a response look like.  I’m not sure I know, but am heartened by some of the ideas put forward by many here today and yesterday.  I can think of a couple of guideposts, though, that could help steer us.  First, I think we need a hypothesis that identifies where the congestion is occurring.  My present view is that we have low interest rates, which should be capable of spurring economic growth, but that something else is gumming up the transmission.  That something may be an econometric view of consumer confidence that is weighted too much toward the wealth effects of shareholder equity and too little toward the wealth effects of home values.  That something may be the absence of value-maximizing behavior in the behavior of servicers and investors.  That something may be decisionmaking by the conservator of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac that is not leading to sustainable loan modifications.  We may determine, ultimately, that the only congestion is one of a rational lag in recovery, or we may determine that there is congestion and decide there is nothing that is within the realm of the Federal Reserve to be done about it.  But we certainly can’t come to any conclusion until we try to reach a consensus about what is gumming up the system. Second, we need to understand that while it may not be our responsibility or congressionally-given right to act out of the box, it is our responsibility to think out of the box.  We need to be actively involved in fertilizing the ideas that our staffs bring forward. Third, we need to think about temporal interconnections between trends.  We’ve talked a lot about them in the last day.  For example, if unemployment stays high for an extended period of time, or, in other words, if the number of long-term unemployed increases or the average amount of time a person is out of a job increases, does this affect consumer confidence.  Does this increase the number of homes put into foreclosure.  Or if interest rates are low for an extended period of time, what yield-chasing activities are resulting in a more destabilized financial system.  And when do we move beyond monitoring and become regulatorily concerned and poised to act.  These are but some questions and guideposts that could keep us on the forefront of making sure that we continue to generate cutting-edge ideas about what our economy is experiencing, with potential applications to what we are choosing to do about it.  It seems to me that the considerable expertise around this table is needed more than ever to press us forward in a joint exploration of what ails this economy and whether we’re going to think about doing something within our power about it.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The author supports alternative B but questions the effectiveness of the LSAP and argues for a different response to address the current economic problems. They suggest that low interest rates alone may not be enough to stimulate economic growth and identify various factors that may be "gumming up the system." They also emphasize the need for innovative thinking and consideration of the interconnections between different trends.


Passage number 348.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 349.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  I support alternative B.  I think the economy is very likely to do somewhat better in the third quarter, as some of these transitory factors depressing activity fade.  I also think it’s not time to change policy, given that, it’s fair to say, the pass-through of the commodity price pressures into generalized prices of goods and services has been a little bit higher than what we were anticipating.  That said, just like we spent a lot of time doing contingency planning on what we’d do on the exit side, I think we need to do contingency planning on what we’d do should economic growth disappoint and inflation begin to decline again as some of these commodity price pressures fade.  Alternative A presents one option in terms of changing the communication by committing the “extended period” language to a particular length of time and adding a commitment to the balance sheet through the middle of 2012.  But I think there are a lot of other options that we need to consider, and I would strongly encourage taking that up. Second, I think in general the statement is a considerable improvement.  I still don’t think it’s quite where I’d like it to be, and I don’t want to make changes at this meeting, but I do think that it needs to evolve a little bit further over time.  Because what we want is paragraph 1 to be a report on what we’re seeing, it needs to be a statement of objective measures of what the data are.  This allows us, then, over time, to call it as we see it without a lot of consequences in terms of what this implies about what we are actually going to do.  And paragraph 2, then, would be about how the Committee views the outlook in light of this objective information.  We’re getting there, but we are not quite there yet.  And I think a number of other people have cited this “loss of momentum” as more of a subjective evaluation of the data rather than a statement of what the data are, and I have some sympathy with that.  Paragraph 2 also has a number of things that you might think should be in paragraph 1:  “The unemployment rate remains elevated” and “Inflation has moved up recently.”  Those are statements of facts, so you could argue that those really belong more in paragraph 1 than paragraph 2.  I wouldn’t suggest making any of these changes at this particular meeting.  Taking out “The unemployment rate remains elevated” at a time that the unemployment rate has been moving higher would be very odd, and the market would have trouble interpreting it.  But I think over time it would be really good to have paragraph 1 be the objective statement of facts and paragraph 2 be our interpretation of it.  I think we need to continue to work in that direction. Finally, let me just make a couple of comments about what other people have raised.  I certainly agree with President Rosengren today that, in your press conference, it is very important that the discussion about the exit strategy is stated in a way that does not imply an early exit.  I know you’ll do that fine.  It is really important that people don’t think that spending so much time on this contingency plan means that exit necessarily lies close at hand. With President Williams, I am sympathetic with his point about what the current degree of monetary policy accommodation means; that was consistent with some of the comments that I was making yesterday.  I don’t feel strongly about it, but if the group would want to remove that reference, I would be happy to take his amendment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and suggestions, but there is no indication of disagreement with others.


Passage number 350.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  I think there’s obviously a broad consensus on alternative B.  There were some interesting language suggestions, and I’d like to take up a couple of them.  First, there seemed to be a lot of support for President Williams’s suggestion to omit part of the first sentence in paragraph 3 and say, “To promote the ongoing economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate,” cut the end of the sentence and go to, “The Committee will keep the target range for the federal funds rate.”  I think that’s fine.  It’s not important, but I think you should be aware that in the April statement, we used that same phraseology to introduce the securities purchases.  So it is a little bit of a swap-around, but I don’t really have any real problem with that.  Is there anyone who has concerns about dropping that language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a potential change in language and mentions that it has been done before without any issues.


Passage number 351.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 352.
 WILLIAMS.  I intended for it to be “The Committee decided today to keep.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states their intention and decision to keep something.


Passage number 353.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  “Decided today to” and then restart with the word “keep” in the next part of the sentence. Next, there was the issue that President Plosser and a number of others have raised about the “momentum” sentence in the first paragraph.  Charlie, could you give us again your proposed language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing a statement and discussing proposed language for a sentence.


Passage number 354.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Let me get the right piece of paper here.  I suggested we could simply say, “Recent labor market indicators have been somewhat weaker than anticipated.”  And that follows from the previous sentence that says that the economy has been a little weaker than we anticipated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is simply suggesting a revision to the wording of a statement.


Passage number 355.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Recent labor market indicators have been weaker than anticipated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a factual statement without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 356.
” MR. PLOSSER.  I think that’s in keeping with President Dudley’s suggestion.  We should just state what the facts are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It mentions President Dudley's suggestion and suggests stating the facts, which implies agreement or alignment.


Passage number 357.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, it does keep with that.  Let me raise one concern.  I am not opposed to this, but I just want to point out that what we’re making a backward-looking statement that both economic growth and labor market have been weaker than expected, and we then go on to say that the slower pace of recovery reflects in part, importantly, factors that are likely to be temporary.  And then we use language that we have used previously.  So I think your suggestion might be okay, but one thing I am a little bit concerned about is that the statement will be read as saying, “Fed Thinks Slowdown Temporary.”  That’s the headline.  That seems a little more optimistic than some of us were.  “Loss of momentum,” as you said, suggests a somewhat longer-lasting problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is raising a concern but not expressing disagreement or arguing against the suggestion made by someone else.


Passage number 358.
 MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman, that goes, though, to what’s in paragraph 2, which is where the expectation is stated.  I didn’t note this a moment ago, but, I have to say, I was struck by the fact that the “expectation” sentence was identical in alternatives A, B, and C.  That is, “expects the pace of recovery to pick up over coming quarters and the unemployment rate to resume its gradual decline.”  I guess what I’m saying is that I understand what you were saying a moment ago, but isn’t it, in fact, what the Committee expects.  That is, when you said you think it’s going to be temporary, that’s what the statement in paragraph 2 is basically saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Tarullo is merely expressing his observation that the "expectation" sentence is identical in all alternatives A, B, and C, and seeking clarification on whether it accurately represents the Committee's expectations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 359.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Actually, one possibility is to use language similar to what I had in my speech in Atlanta where I said, “pick up somewhat.”  Maybe that would be—can we do that.  I’m trying to avoid giving the sense that we think this is entirely temporary.  Yet another approach is President Rosengren’s suggestion about adding a sentence in paragraph 2 saying that the Committee perceives that downside risks to economic growth have increased.  I would note that adding that would be a very significant change, because would we then also have an inflation risk component.  We haven’t been using the “risk” language.  I’m not saying we shouldn’t do it, but I’m a little afraid of doing it on the fly.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. This can be seen in the phrases "I’m trying to avoid giving the sense that we think this is entirely temporary" and "I’m not saying we shouldn’t do it, but I’m a little afraid of doing it on the fly." These statements indicate a disagreement or differing opinions on how to address the issue being discussed.


Passage number 360.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Well, I was just going to comment, because in the last two meetings, we have talked about exactly this.  When the balance of risk actually rose for both inflation and output at the last meeting, we resisted reporting that in the statement.  I am all in favor of talking about whether there is a way to systematically communicate this, either through the SEP or what we publish, but like you, I would be reluctant  to do it on the fly here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is commenting on the previous meetings and expressing his agreement with the idea of finding a systematic way to communicate the balance of risk.


Passage number 361.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot answer without more context.


Passage number 362.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think risk is a complicated concept.  I think it is a good idea to include language about it, but I think we should do it contemporaneously with actually releasing our projections about risk— something down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the idea of including language about risk, but suggests that it should be done at a later time in conjunction with releasing projections about risk.


Passage number 363.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The term "Vice Chairman" is a neutral term that does not indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 364.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  I’m less concerned about alternative B creating the wrong impression because you are going to give a press conference, and you are going to have the projections.  And the projections, I think, in some ways will speak for themselves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The person speaking is expressing disagreement with someone else's concern about alternative B creating the wrong impression. They believe that the press conference and projections will accurately convey the intended message.


Passage number 365.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that is an important point.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply expressing the speaker's opinion on the importance of a certain point. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 366.
 MR. FISHER.  I do want to keep “employment” in there.  I mean, after all, we have a dual mandate.  I do also agree we should get rid of “loss of momentum.”  Maybe you could use Charlie’s alternative language or you could just say that “The economic recovery and employment are continuing at a moderate pace, though somewhat more slowly than we had expected,” so you could work the word “employment” in there.  I don’t want to eliminate it entirely in the first paragraph.  It’s improving much more slowly than we had expected, but it’s still continuing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher expresses his agreement with getting rid of the phrase "loss of momentum" and suggests alternative language, but there is no contention or disagreement expressed between the speakers.


Passage number 367.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, there is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 368.
  MR. LACKER.  You brought up risks, and I agree with President Kocherlakota.  I think introducing downside risk is going to be taken as a bigger worry than I think we collectively have about the possibility of a contraction in economic activity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. Both individuals mentioned, Mr. Lacker and President Kocherlakota, seem to be in agreement about the topic of introducing downside risk and their concerns regarding a contraction in economic activity.


Passage number 369.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I guess my proposal would be to replace the “momentum” sentence with Charlie’s language:  “Also, recent labor market indicators have been weaker than anticipated.”   I also think that the Vice Chairman’s point is important, that news coverage will also have to include coverage of the changes in the projections, which will make very explicit the fact that we expect economic growth to be slower going forward.  I didn’t hear a lot of support for “pick up somewhat,” unless I’m mistaken.  Let’s see.  Charlie also wanted to say that “Inflation expectations have remained close to historical norms.”  I think we’ve said they’ve been stable for a really long time, and I don’t know how people would interpret that change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting changes and expressing their thoughts on the matter.


Passage number 370.
 MR. PLOSSER.  One of the things that we want to think about is, when we talk about expectations, it is fairly vague.  It’s not well defined in some sense, and different people look at different things.  Going forward, we might think about how to structure that with a little more precision, if we can, about what it is we are actually referring to.  That’s just a suggestion to think about improving that language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is merely suggesting that they consider improving the language regarding expectations by making it more precise.


Passage number 371.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It is a latent variable that we’re referring to.  But there are a number of those measures that we use.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that there is a latent variable being referred to, and there are multiple measures being used to assess it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 372.
 MR. PLOSSER.  And they do behave differently sometimes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage mentions that "they" (presumably referring to individuals or entities) behave differently sometimes, indicating a possibility of contention or disagreement about their behavior.


Passage number 373.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  They do.  I think the volatility around where we want it to be has been limited.  And the important fact about the intermeeting period, in fact, is that things seemed to have generally moved in the right direction in terms of inflation expectations.  All right.  If everybody agrees, what we’re proposing is to replace the sentence about the loss of momentum with the Plosser proposal:  “Also, recent labor market indicators have been weaker than anticipated,” and then to drop the part of the first sentence in 3.  Any other comments.  [No response]  Debbie, are you ready to read the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for agreement and feedback on a proposed change to the statement, but there is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 374.
 MS. DANKER.  Yes.  Okay.  Are we ready to vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 375.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without context.


Passage number 376.
 MS. DANKER.  Okay.  We’ll be voting on alternative B that’s in the handout and the directive for alternative B that’s in the handout.  The statement has the following two amendments.  I’ll read the first two sentences of paragraph 1 and the first sentence of paragraph 3, as amended.  “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April indicates that the economic recovery is continuing at a moderate pace, though somewhat more slowly than the Committee had expected.  Also, recent labor market indicators have been weaker than anticipated.”  Paragraph 3 says “To promote the ongoing economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee continues to anticipate that economic conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the information and decisions made by the committee.


Passage number 377.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker simply affirmatively responds to something or expresses agreement.


Passage number 378.
 MS. DANKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 379.
 Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley   Yes Governor Duke Yes President Evans  Yes President Fisher   Yes President Kocherlakota Yes President Plosser  Yes Governor Raskin  Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes Governor Yellen Yes  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  I assume coffee is ready.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The list of names is likely indicating agreement or consensus among the individuals mentioned. The statement about coffee being ready is unrelated to the previous information.


Passage number 380.
 MS. DANKER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without providing the specific passage, it is difficult to determine if there is contention or disagreement. However, the response "Yes" suggests that there is indeed contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 381.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we take a coffee break and return at 11:15.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting taking a coffee break and expressing gratitude by saying "thank you" at the end.


Passage number 382.
  [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Item 6 on the agenda is a discussion and approval of proposed policies on external communications.  Governor Yellen’s subcommittee has been working hard and consulting with you, and I want to thank her and the members of her subcommittee for their hard work.  Let me turn now to Janet for a discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging the work done by Governor Yellen and the subcommittee.


Passage number 383.
 MS. YELLEN.7  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And I, too, want to start by expressing my gratitude to Governor Duke and to Presidents Fisher and Rosengren for all of their contributions over the past several months in the work of our subcommittee.  Today we’d like to present for the Committee’s consideration a pair of policies concerning the external communications of Committee participants and Federal Reserve System staff, respectively.  In drafting these policies, we benefited enormously from the Committee’s extended discussion of communications issues last January and from many helpful comments and suggestions we received after we circulated initial drafts of these policies to the Committee in mid-May.  We’ve made a number of revisions in response to your input. Before moving these policies for adoption, however, I’d like to make a couple of comments about their overarching purpose.  First, each policy is framed as a set of general principles, not a detailed rule book.  The policies include some examples to illustrate the application of these principles, but each policy concludes by noting that those examples are not intended to serve as an exhaustive list, and hence that good judgment will be essential in applying the principles.  As an analogy, one might think of these principles as corresponding to the Ten Commandments, while the list of examples is akin to Talmudic commentary.  [Laughter] Second, these policies are intended to represent the broad consensus of the Committee regarding the principles that should apply to our external communications.  Indeed, I hope that virtually anyone who looks at the policies would see these principles as essentially unobjectionable and consistent with common sense.  One important consequence is that the  7The materials for the discussion of policies on external communications are appended to this transcript (appendix 7).  policies do not extend to some aspects of our external communications on which there is no clear consensus.  An example would be the extent to which participants should avoid staking out positions in advance of FOMC meetings. Third, these policies are intended to reinforce the public’s confidence in the transparency and integrity of our monetary policy process.  If the Committee proceeds to adopt the policies, that decision will be reported in the minutes of this meeting, and I wanted to note that our plan is to post the policies on our public website.  But we don’t anticipate doing so with trumpets and fanfare surrounding their publication.  Rather, I think it’s reasonable to view the adoption of these policies as essentially clarifying and formalizing the set of principles that we have been previously following, but on an informal basis.  To introduce another analogy, we could view this step as roughly equivalent to moving from a common law system to a written constitution, although I will defer to the lawyers on our Committee if they disagree with that analogy. Fourth, these policies are intended to complement the ethics principles in the Federal Reserve Administrative Manual (FRAM) and other codes of ethical conduct for Federal Reserve officials and staff.  However, those ethics codes are mainly oriented toward avoiding conflicts of interest in financial transactions, whereas these policies are focused on external communications.  It’s also worth noting that the guidelines in FRAM, which were adopted in 1970, are labeled as voluntary.  That suggests that a senior Federal Reserve official could simply opt out of the policy at any time.  If our goal is to reinforce the public’s confidence in the integrity of our contacts with outside individuals and organizations, I think it’s essential to establish a binding set of principles to govern our external communications.  In particular, these policies indicate that the FOMC itself will be responsible for ensuring that all Committee participants abide by these principles while each Bank president will be responsible for overseeing the conduct of that Bank’s staff, and the Chairman will maintain that responsibility for Board staff. Finally, I want to emphasize that, in contrast to the Ten Commandments, the specific language of these policies is not written in stone.  I would instead hope that these principles will be living and breathing documents that the Committee will reaffirm at our organizational meeting each January, and that they can evolve over time as appropriate.  For example, we have to ensure that the policy pertaining to staff doesn’t inadvertently hamper their research activities, since that research plays such a key role in advancing our understanding of monetary policy.  Therefore, over the coming months, I think it would be very helpful if the research directors were to take a very close look at the practical implications of the staff policy and to report back to us about any fine-tuning adjustments that they think would be helpful or necessary. So let me stop there.  I’d like to move adoption of these policies by the Committee, and I’d be happy to address any specific questions.  Dan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, expresses gratitude to her colleagues and presents a pair of policies for consideration. She states that the policies are intended to represent the broad consensus of the Committee and reinforce the public's confidence in the transparency and integrity of their monetary policy process. She also mentions that the specific language of these policies can evolve over time. Overall, there is a sense of unity and agreement in this passage.


Passage number 384.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Janet.  I think that you and the subcommittee have done a terrific job of walking down the middle, as Richard might have said, between excessive generalities and excessive specificity.  I do have one question, which relates to a change that you made in response to a legitimate concern that somebody had, and the question is on paragraph 7 of the participants’ policy.  This pertains to the last sentence of paragraph 7.  The original language, I believe, read, “During each blackout period, participants refrain from communicating with members of the public about macroeconomic developments or monetary policy issues.”  I believe that the legitimate concern that was raised was that it sounded as though you couldn’t ask somebody else what they thought was going on in the macroeconomy, which didn’t seem part of what we had in mind.  The way it’s been rephrased, though, now says, “participants refrain from expressing their views … in meetings or conversations with members of the public,” and there’s at least a little bit of ambiguity there, I think, suggesting that it is the forum which is dispositive as opposed to the act of communicating the views to the public.  I wonder if you’d clarify that a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about a change made in response to a concern, and the speaker is seeking clarification on the wording.


Passage number 385.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thanks for the question.  I’d be happy to clarify and welcome other members of the subcommittee to weigh in on this.  There was no intention in this revision to delineate anything about acceptable or unacceptable forums or forms of communication.  So we used the phrase “meetings or conversations” as a synonym for the word “contacts,” which appears in a number of other places in the policy, and so I translate “meetings or conversations” as simply broadly referring to all contacts.  We use the term “members of the public.”  And that’s a phrase that appears repeatedly in the policy and is meant to refer to all members of the public and, for example, would include the press.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 386.
 MR. FISHER.  Does that answer your question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks if the previous statement answers the question.


Passage number 387.
 MR. TARULLO.  I think so.  In essence, the subcommittee’s intention is that this means participants refrain from, if I can put it this way, communicating their views about macroeconomic developments or monetary policy issues to members of the public.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Tarullo agrees with the subcommittee's intention regarding the communication of views about macroeconomic developments or monetary policy issues by participants to members of the public.


Passage number 388.
 MS. YELLEN.  Correct.  Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 389.
 MR. BULLARD.  I also appreciate the work of the subcommittee on what I think is a very difficult topic.  I have some concerns that I’ve discussed previously with Governor Yellen and President Fisher.  I think there are a lot of gray areas here, and I think this cannot really be helped when you write down a document like this, but it does set up some problems of interpretation, in my view, especially for our staff.  I’m concerned that this document could be over-interpreted far beyond what is intended by this communications subcommittee, and that this could inhibit what we now consider normal staff activities.  This type of over-interpretation, just based on a reading of a vague document, can often happen in a large bureaucracy like the Fed. I’ll give you one example.  The New York Fed has recently put out an innovative approach to communication, the Liberty Street Blog.  A very good researcher in the System, Gauti Eggertsson, put something on the blog based on his research in which he argues that the current FOMC will not repeat the mistake of 1937 for reasons that he exposits on the blog.  I would consider something like this a very normal staff activity.  In fact, I would consider robust and active debate of this type as an important contribution to high-quality monetary policy.  But when I read the document here, it says, “Staff should refrain from publicly expressing their own personal views regarding prospective monetary policy decisions,” which could put an end to that kind of a blog.  So a literal reading of the staff portion of the memo might circumscribe Gauti’s behavior.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement between Mr. Bullard and the communications subcommittee regarding the interpretation and potential impact of the document on staff activities. Mr. Bullard expresses concern that the document could be over-interpreted and inhibit normal staff activities like the Liberty Street Blog.


Passage number 390.
 MR. TARULLO.  Jim, could I ask you to clarify.  You said the blog said that we will not make that mistake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 391.
 MR. BULLARD.  He thinks we won’t because he thinks we’ll look through commodity prices and we won’t make that mistake.   If this interpretation takes hold, I would view that as a very negative development in the Federal Reserve System.  It would be the opposite of the open debate that I think is most appropriate and helpful for monetary policy.  Unless you think that it can’t happen here, I will remind you that there was a time in the Federal Reserve System when staff behavior was tightly circumscribed and people were, in fact, fired inside the System for their views, and it was a serious situation.  That has a chilling effect on the staff.  The staff does not want to work on pressing issues that face this Committee for fear of running afoul of vague rules.  They can decide to do other activities, work on something else, and not address the key concerns of the Committee.  So my suggestion would be to reconsider the staff portion of this memo.  I appreciate that Governor Yellen has suggested that we ask the research directors to look at it and see what they think, but I want it to be on the record here that if that’s the direction the interpretation goes, I would be very much opposed to that. My second concern is that the off-the-record interview is not addressed in this document.  To the extent that we have noncollegial behavior on this Committee—and I don’t think that we really do to a large extent, but to the extent that we do—it comes through the off-the-record interview.  And what are the rules about those interviews.  Do all of these rules apply to those situations. My third concern, which is far more minor, is that the idea of a blackout only applies to speeches or appearances that concern monetary policy or macroeconomic developments.  But the current blackout, the one that we’re in right now, if I count it correctly, had four appearances, one op-ed, and three appearances by FOMC members.  All of them were excellent.  They were not policy related, but I think it’s a very slippery slope to start having lots of presentations, especially when you have any kind of Q&A or anything during a blackout period.  Even if you say, “I’m not going to talk about policy issues,” it can be, “Okay, I’m not talking directly about monetary policy, but I’m going to go to a conference on commodity prices, and I’m going to characterize my views about commodity prices.”  And then you say, “Well, that was not a monetary policy discussion.  It was a commodity prices discussion,” but yes, it impinges on what our views on policy would be.  So I think it’s a very slippery slope to get into the business of doing a lot of presentations and appearances during a blackout in which you’re going to define what macroeconomics is and what macroeconomics is not.  The system could break down if we allowed too much of that to go on.  But that’s more of a minor concern.  I think most of the things that we do are very reasonable on the blackout.  For all of us, it gives us something of a respite—that is, a reason that you can turn down invitations because you’re going to go on a blackout.  I think it generally works pretty well, but I think that part is a slippery slope. My main concern, then, is the impact of the vague document on the staff and the possible chilling effect of open discussion within the Federal Reserve System.  Second, I do have concerns about the off-the-record interview because it is not addressed in this document.  And third, the application of the blackout.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, expresses his opposition to the interpretation that the Federal Reserve System won't make the mistake of looking through commodity prices. He believes that this interpretation would be a negative development and goes against the open debate that he believes is necessary for monetary policy. He also expresses concerns about the impact on the staff, the rules for off-the-record interviews, and the application of the blackout period.


Passage number 392.
 MS. YELLEN.  Maybe I’ll just respond briefly on the first two.  With respect to the potential chilling effect on staff research, that’s certainly something that the subcommittee has absolutely no intention of having occur, and because we all realize that these are principles, we’ve only given a few examples of how these principles would apply in areas that are either clearly black or clearly white, and we recognize that there are gray areas.  I think those types of examples would be very helpful, especially for staff.  That’s why I particularly would urge the research directors to sit down and to discuss concrete examples.  I don’t know the Eggertsson paper, so I can’t weigh in on the particulars there, but we have thought about whether or not this principle applying to staff would restrict legitimate and valuable research, and as we’ve thought about it, I don’t see that it will.  What the principle is saying is that the official staff—that is, officers—should not express normative views about forthcoming policy decisions.  That doesn’t mean you can’t do a research paper and say a particular consideration, like the impact of energy prices on future core inflation, would suggest a particular policy approach.  What’s to be avoided is saying, “In my personal view, I believe that in an upcoming meeting, the right thing for the FOMC to do is X.”  There could be a consideration you’ve discussed in a research paper that points in a particular direction.  You articulate that, but as long as you recognize that, for example, when the FOMC makes decisions, there are a lot of different things on the table at the same time.  That might be one thing that would be an important consideration, but this Committee might consider other things at the same time.  So it’s to say, at the next meeting or in forthcoming meetings, official staff shouldn’t be saying, “The right thing for the FOMC to do at the next meeting is X,” and the other thing that official staff should not do is speculate, “I think the Committee at the next meeting will do X.”  It’s intended to be rather limited, and I think it’s very important for the research directors to consider concrete examples of the kinds of things staff really do face, and to think things through.  And if the way this policy is worded is inadvertently restrictive of legitimate research activities and presentations, please come back and we will reconsider the language. On the off-the-record interviews, our subcommittee discussed this issue.  We recognized there were strong feelings around the table, and I think it fell in an area where we cannot get agreement, and we simply omitted it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Yellen is discussing the potential chilling effect on staff research and suggesting that concrete examples would be helpful for the research directors to consider. She also states that if the policy wording inadvertently restricts legitimate research activities, it can be reconsidered. The only area where there was no agreement is on the issue of off-the-record interviews, which was omitted from the discussion.


Passage number 393.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or expressing any ideas, therefore there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 394.
 WILLIAMS.  I want to add my thanks to the members of the subcommittee for their work on external communications.  I agree they managed to strike a reasonable balance between the various aims of our external communication.  These are difficult issues.  I’m going to pick up on the staff issue, and I appreciate, Governor Yellen, this idea of getting feedback and seeing how this actually works.  I’m going to mention one potential challenge and, I hope, a constructive idea about how research can be done within the confines of this rule.  The guidelines—and this is a separate issue than President Bullard mentioned—restrict staff economists from communicating with outside researchers, including academics, about any analysis, methods, or models currently in use but not available to the public.  Now, having been a staff economist in the Fed System for 16 years, I can personally attest to the value of such consultations with outside scholars.  Outside experts challenge our assumptions, they challenge our methods, and they provide a check on group-think.  To take one example, the FRB/US model, which I worked on for many years, benefited from the critical scrutiny and suggestions that we received from outside experts.  Even models regularly in use need further, even continual refinement, and the same applies to models used for forecasting and the DSGE models we talked about yesterday. I understand the concerns that led to the new restrictions on the staff interactions with outside experts, but given that these interactions improve the quality of staff analysis and, importantly, ultimately improve our policy decisions, we need to ensure that the staff continues to receive ongoing feedback from outside experts within the confines of the new rules.  Indeed, staff may need more public outlets for current analysis, such as economic letters and blogs, so that they are free to discuss their methods with outside experts.  These public outlets and the dialogue with outside experts that they foster contribute to greater transparency and accountability for staff research and analysis.  I’m speaking from our experience in San Francisco with our Economic Letters, and our FedViews—but many of the Federal Reserve Banks have done the same thing.  Putting our current analysis and our policy-oriented or current research out publicly frees you up to talk to any outside experts about the models you’re using and the results you’ve got, and it allows you to have those very fruitful conversations.  But if you don’t have those outlets available—and I’m not thinking about academic research right now—then you couldn’t talk to the outside experts about what you are using in your policy analysis.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Williams expresses his agreement and appreciation for the work of the subcommittee on external communications and their ability to strike a reasonable balance. He then raises a potential challenge and provides a constructive idea for how research can be done within the confines of the rule. While he acknowledges the concerns that led to the new restrictions, he argues for the importance of ongoing feedback from outside experts and suggests the use of public outlets for current analysis. Overall, there is no evident contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 395.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  This is meant to be a guideline, and it’s not a substitute for common sense, so I think we have to remember that common sense needs to play a significant role in how we apply this.  The goal is not to stifle research, but if the policy conclusion from research is, “At the next meeting, they should raise rates,” well, that probably is going to be a problem.  But if instead they say, “The path implied by the model is this,” that probably is not going to be a problem.  I think the research directors can spend some time thinking about some examples that apply common sense in a reasonable way, but I think part of it is tied to the specificity.  There is a risk to the organization if anyone in the organization, at least from the perception of the press, can speak broadly for the organization.  There is reputational risk that this is partly trying to address.  The San Francisco commentary series is a great place to put comments on how we’re thinking about models.  But if instead of putting it on the commentary series, one person who sells his own forecast to hedge funds gets the idea that “This is the way the San Francisco Fed and the Fed in general is thinking about things,” and it’s not common knowledge, and he goes and sells that knowledge to a hedge fund, that is a reputational risk to the organization.  The solution to that is having satisfactory outlets so that the public at large can see these types of things rather than giving commercial advantage to any one person or organization.  Again, I think we can come up with some commonsense solutions that reduce our risk as an organization that we look like we’re giving preferential treatment at times to individuals or organizations.  That’s more what it’s designed to do than in any way stifle the ability of the research community to do good research and to publicly explain it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly discusses the importance of common sense in applying guidelines, the potential risks to the organization, and the need for satisfactory outlets to share information publicly.


Passage number 396.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The passage simply provides an abbreviated identification of someone or something with the initials "MR" without stating any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 397.
 WILLIAMS.  We are in complete agreement.  My point was, to the extent that parts of the Federal Reserve System don’t have outlets for your thinking on current analysis, modeling, and research, then it is going to be a clampdown on the ability to talk to outside experts.  In some sense, I think we should have more transparency about what we’re doing, and we should make it publicly available like we’ve done in San Francisco and like many other Banks have done for a long time.  That way I can go talk, for example, to Jim Stock about the inflation model that I’ve been working on because my model is out there in the public and widely available.  I think we’re agreeing, but I don’t think the Board, for example, just to be specific, has an economic letter or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both parties are in agreement about the need for more transparency and making research publicly available.


Passage number 398.
 MR. FISHER.  If I can add to Janet’s and Eric’s point—and Eric nailed it, saying it’s an appeal to common sense—what we don’t want is for people to speculate or telescope policy decisions either publicly or, very importantly, in a way that someone can profit.  That’s really what this comes down to.  We’re not trying to suppress thought or research that informs us.  It’s really a matter of—particularly on the staff level but also among principals—telescoping or speculating about where we’re likely to end up after a meeting, as we approach that meeting, or what the next steps may be or the intention of the Committee is in terms of the next steps it’s going to take.  I come back to Eric’s key point and Janet’s, these are commonsense guidelines, and I think that’s the spirit in which we crafted them, and it’s the spirit with which they should be observed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the points made by Janet and Eric and emphasizes that the guidelines are meant to prevent speculation or profiting from policy decisions.


Passage number 399.
 MS. YELLEN.  Jeff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context to suggest the presence of contention or disagreement. It only mentions a person's name without any additional details.


Passage number 400.
 MR. LACKER.  I second the motion on the floor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with and supports the motion that has been proposed.


Passage number 401.
 MS. DUKE.  I would like to go back to the comment on the staff policy and say that I think there was one line that we meant to draw, and that was having a Fed official speculate publicly about what this Committee might do, might not do, should do, should not do—whether it’s in a paper, it’s in a speech, it’s in a blog, wherever it is, I think that’s a problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by MS. DUKE expressing her opinion on a staff policy.


Passage number 402.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  You write a paper, and the paper says what the Committee should do is switch to monetary targeting.  You’re saying, “I did some research, and my research says you should switch to monetary targeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Bullard regarding a research paper and its recommendation.


Passage number 403.
” MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of any disagreement or contention in the passage, as it only provides the name "MR. KOCHERLAKOTA" without any context or information about him.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 404.
  I think that it’s different if you say, “The implications of the analysis in this paper are that the Committee should—” MR. EVANS.  It’s a framework, not an action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation:
In the passage, there is a disagreement between two individuals. The speaker initially expresses their opinion that the implications of the analysis suggest a certain action should be taken. However, Mr. Evans contradicts this by stating that it is a framework, not an action. This indicates a disagreement or contention between the two speakers regarding the interpretation of the analysis and the course of action it suggests.


Passage number 405.
 MR. BULLARD.  It’s vague.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement simply mentions that something is vague without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 406.
 MS. YELLEN.  Well, the research directors can try to take an example like that and indicate what they think is appropriate, and I think they’re going to decide that that’s perfectly fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Yellen is expressing agreement with the research directors' decision.


Passage number 407.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  I guess I think we all basically have an understanding of what we have in mind here, and I do think there’s a bit of a risk of over-interpretation in the future, you could say.  And then you’re working as a staff person, and you’re not sure how the rules are going to come down.  All of a sudden somebody is really mad at you because you did something, and you thought that this was okay.  That’s the danger of having a vague set of rules at the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing a concern about potential difficulties and misunderstandings that may arise from having vague rules, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 408.
 MR. TARULLO.  Except, Jim, they have the opportunity to show it to their research director before they publish it and to get a sense if there’s a problem with it, and then that can be worked out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Tarullo is simply explaining that individuals have the opportunity to review their research with their research director before publishing it in order to identify and address any potential problems.


Passage number 409.
 MR. BULLARD.  Indeed they do, and there was a time when all papers in the System were vetted through channels, and we spent a lot of time reading each other’s’ papers and vetting them and circling sentences that we thought were referring to the dollar and all kinds of stuff like that.  And we got rid of that because it was unproductive, it was useless, and it didn’t promote the open discussion that I think we’ve achieved.  My only point is that I’d be loath to turn that tide back and go in a different direction.  And I appreciate what’s being done here.  I think there is understanding around the table.  I wanted to have this discussion so that we don’t go in the wrong direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the current approach and the open discussion that has been achieved. They do not want to revert back to the previous vetting process and express appreciation for what is being done.


Passage number 410.
 MR. TARULLO.  Let me draw a distinction, if I could, between, on the one hand, having to submit something for prior restraint, and, on the other hand, allowing a staff person to, on his or her own initiative if he or she is worried about potential consequences, show it to a research director.  I think there’s a rather fundamental difference between those two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It only acknowledges a distinction between two different actions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 411.
 MR. HOENIG.  Just a point of clarification based on this conversation.  These are identified as “policies,” and, Eric, you said “guidelines,” and, Richard, you said “guidelines.”  It’s subtle, but are these guidelines, or is this a policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the point of clarification raised by Mr. Hoenig regarding the use of the terms "policies" and "guidelines" by Eric and Richard. The difference in their terminology suggests a disagreement or differing understanding of whether the identified rules should be classified as policies or guidelines.


Passage number 412.
  MS. YELLEN.  It’s a formal policy, and we have moved it for adoption.  I’m going to ask for the Committee’s approval of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It states that a formal policy has been moved for adoption and the person speaking is asking for the Committee's approval.


Passage number 413.
 MR. HOENIG.  Right.  And just to clarify it, “policy” is a stronger statement than “guidelines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply clarifying that "policy" is a stronger statement than "guidelines."


Passage number 414.
” MS. YELLEN.  It’s not informal.  It’s not voluntary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Ms. Yellen is a straightforward assertion about the nature of something, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information provided.


Passage number 415.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Could I comment on this debate.  The Atlanta blog, I think, is a really good example of policy-relevant, topical commentary, which does a really nice job of avoiding the problem.  The way I would express the problem would be that we don’t want a situation in which staff are saying things that move markets or confuse the public about what the current near-term policies are likely to be.  Even with the Eggertsson paper, I think the research is very interesting and very relevant.  I’m not sure that I like very much the statement that we will not do this, because it does have implications.  I have had some conversations recently in other contexts about policies toward research publications, and my very strong view is that it’s best to have a policy that Fed staffers are allowed to do research on whatever topic they’d like, and it doesn’t represent an official position of the Board.  Once you censor one paper and then you don’t censor another, people are going to assume that there’s some implicit imprimatur being given to the paper that is not censored.  I don’t think this policy is a restriction that will stifle serious research.  I would add also, finally, that these policies are supposed to be implemented at the Reserve Banks by the president of each Reserve Bank.  So each of you will have opportunities to make these judgments and make sure that within your Bank the appropriate lines are drawn. We have a motion, and we have a second.  We’re going to take one vote on these two policies.  My understanding is, as a procedural matter, that this is a vote of the Committee—that is, the same people who vote on the current action and the statement.  That being said, I think it would be very interesting and useful to know what everybody around the table thinks, so I’m going to ask for a vote of all 17 folks around the table.  We will probably report, I assume, the FOMC’s official vote but also indicate in the minutes the views of the broader group, if that’s okay.  We have a motion, and it is has been seconded.  How many are in favor, please.  I think we have a unanimous vote.  Thank you.  And thank you, Janet. We have a couple of minutes, so maybe we could take a quick look at that updated version of the exit strategy that we sent out yesterday.8  And I don’t intend to get into any extended discussion here.  This is the same as what you got yesterday, so let me go through this quickly.  The changes that have been made—first, in paragraph 3, instead of saying “relatively soon thereafter,” we say “sometime thereafter,” to loosen the temporal connection between ceasing reinvesting and modifying the policy guidance.  Similarly, in paragraph 5, we have struck the phrase “probably within a few months.”  And, again, the purpose of this is to give us  8 The revised materials for the discussion of exit strategy principles are appended to this transcript (appendix 8). some flexibility in terms of the speed at which the sequence is executed, because, arguably, it could depend on economic conditions.  We added the phrase “up or down,” suggested by President Plosser.  We made the change suggested by the Vice Chairman about reducing the portfolio to “the smallest levels that would be consistent with the efficient implementation of monetary policy.” Now, the one place where I thought there was not necessarily a clear preference in terms of giving times had to do with the horizon over which we eliminate our holdings of agency securities.  And, indeed, we have, I think, put in the minutes that the majority of the Committee participants were in favor of something approximating five years.  Let me try to get your sense of this.  First of all, we’ve added the option of selling agency securities over three to five years as opposed to four to five.  One of the memos we circulated made the point that if we sell agency securities more quickly it doesn’t have that much effect on the overall size of the portfolio.  So even if we sell the agency securities in three years, it would still take two to three years to normalize the size of the overall portfolio.  If we sell them in five years, it only adds about six months, or something on that order, to the time needed to get to the $25 billion of excess reserves associated with our pre-crisis policies.  This is just for straw vote purposes—do we want to ask the question about three to five years versus four to five.  Then I’d be interested to get a sense of the Committee’s preference about simply leaving out the time frame.  I gather that was something about which there were some strong objections.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of statements and requests for consensus.


Passage number 416.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a very quick question of what we mean.  When we say that “The pace of sales is expected to be aimed at eliminating our holdings … over a period of three to five years,” do we mean from today, or from when the sales start.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the timeline for the sales.


Passage number 417.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  When we start sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The provided information does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 418.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So do we need to clarify that.  Because one could read that either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question about the need for clarification, stating that there is potential ambiguity in the given context.


Passage number 419.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "I see" is a simple statement and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 420.
  Why don’t we say, “Once sales begin,” something like that, “the pace of sales is expected”— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  I think you need to clarify it, so people don’t misinterpret that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests the need for clarification to avoid misinterpretation.


Passage number 421.
 MR. LACKER.  Wait.  That means the clock starts, and it could take five years after that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the proposed timeline.


Passage number 422.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s why we’re including “three,” because if you start later you’ll have a smaller portfolio, so you’d want to start faster.  I wanted to clarify that, so that there is no ambiguity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply explaining the reason for including the number "three" and the need to start faster to build a larger portfolio. The clarification is provided to avoid any confusion or ambiguity in the information.


Passage number 423.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You can’t make assumptions today about when we’ll be initiating sales.  So why don’t we say something like “Once sales begin, the pace of sales.” Does anybody want to speak on the issue of “three to five” versus “four to five”.  Let’s do it sequentially.  Once we have a determination on that, I will open the floor for those who might want to just not use numbers there at all.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing different options and seeking input from others, but there is no strong disagreement or conflict expressed.


Passage number 424.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The whole issue of “three to five” is that you just don’t know when you’re going to start.  And since you don’t know when you’re going to start, you don’t know how big the agency MBS portfolio is going to be at the starting point.  You can imagine a situation where we start very late, and we don’t have a very big agency MBS portfolio, so we want to make it a short period of time of sales.  Or we start very early and we have a much bigger portfolio—that’s the logic of having a little bit more range there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply presenting different scenarios and explaining the rationale behind them.


Passage number 425.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Even though we have a reinvestment policy, we’re reinvesting in Treasuries, and the MBS are running off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a reinvestment policy in place where the reinvestment is happening in Treasuries, while the MBS (Mortgage-Backed Securities) are running off.


Passage number 426.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And they’re running off at what rate, roughly, Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a simple statement or question about how fast "they" are running. There is no contentious or disagreeable language or tone present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 427.
 MR. SACK.  Over the next several years, probably about $100 billion a year.  My concern about saying “three to five” is that while you may be interpreting “three” as the outcome if the sales begin late, the market wouldn’t know that from this.  So the market could make the inference that the Committee would consider selling at a pace of $300 billion a year.  We currently have $950 billion or so of agency MBS.  By saying “three to five,” it at least opens the door for interpretation that the sales would actually be at a faster pace than suggested by previous communications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sack expresses concern about the possibility of the market inferring a faster pace of sales than suggested by previous communications if the phrase "three to five" is used. This suggests a disagreement or contention regarding the potential interpretation of the sales pace.


Passage number 428.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.  That’s a good point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While the passage acknowledges a point made, it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 429.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we should give at least some consideration to the other memo that Brian and colleagues circulated that suggested that the net supply of MBS to the market was actually going to be pretty high over the next few years because of the portfolio of the GSEs being run down, because of Treasury sales, and some other factors.  That would argue for the “four to five,” I think.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that consideration should be given to another memo that presents a different viewpoint, but they do not express disagreement with it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 430.
 MR. FISHER.  I don’t want to jump ahead here, but this is why I’m chary about putting specific time references in here.  The point is, I can see both sides of the argument.  We’re going to do it in a way that is designed to minimize the extent to which we might affect the allocation of credit across sectors of the economy.  The reason we put a time frame in there—and, I would argue, one of the arguments for that—would be just to make sure it’s clear this isn’t going to go on forever.  Forgive me, Mr. Hoenig, but I have a feeling that’s your driving impetus here.  But, you know, this is a debate—“four to five,” “three to five.”  First, we don’t know when the sales are going to start.  And, second, we are going to do it in a way that minimizes its impact.  That’s what our expectations are.  So I could argue both sides.  I agree with Tom’s concern, I don’t want this to be pushed off indefinitely.  But I think we are boxing ourselves in again by having a specific time frame here.  I don’t think we need to do that right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, mentions that he can see both sides of the argument and expresses concerns about putting specific time references in the plan. He argues that having a specific time frame may restrict the decision and that it is unnecessary at the moment. This disagreement is evident in his statement, "I agree with Tom’s concern, I don’t want this to be pushed off indefinitely. But I think we are boxing ourselves in again by having a specific time frame here. I don’t think we need to do that right now."


Passage number 431.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you have a language suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a simple question asking for a language suggestion. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 432.
 MR. FISHER.  My preference, trusting that this thing will not go on forever and that the Manager will not allow it to exist forever, would simply be to say that, “Once sales begin, the pace of sales are expected to be aimed at eliminating our holdings of agency securities over a period designed to minimize the extent to which the SOMA portfolio might affect the allocation of credit across sectors of the economy.”  We could break it up like we did that last sentence, but the point is to take out the specific time reference of three or four to five years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Fisher, expressing his preference for removing a specific time reference in a particular sentence.


Passage number 433.
 MR. TARULLO.  So what happens in the next sentence, Richard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a dialogue or conversation where Mr. Tarullo is asking a question to Richard.


Passage number 434.
 MR. FISHER.  I would do the same.  The problem is putting a specific time frame in there.  We can argue how many angels dance on the head of a pin.  Is it “two to three” or “three to five”.  But I’m also sympathetic to Tom’s argument here, in that we want to at least have an outer limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is stating that he agrees with Tom but also acknowledges that there may be different interpretations or opinions on the timeframe being discussed.


Passage number 435.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Just a suggestion.  I haven’t got the right wording here, but we could say, “We will eliminate our holdings of agency securities as promptly as possible while minimizing the effect on”—saying we want to get these off our portfolio.  We don’t want to disrupt the market, but we are going to do it as promptly as we can without disrupting the market, some phrase like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is offering a suggestion on how to phrase a statement without expressing any opposition or discord.


Passage number 436.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We have to get the market disruption idea in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a clear directive, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 437.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser simply agrees or affirms a statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 438.
  So it’s done quickly, but it’s conditional on— MR. FISHER.  The one thing we agree on is, we don’t want to disrupt the marketplace.  What we don’t agree on is the time frame.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "The one thing we agree on is, we don’t want to disrupt the marketplace" indicates some level of consensus. However, the following statement "What we don’t agree on is the time frame" suggests that there is disagreement about when the task should be completed.


Passage number 439.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s true.  There would also be some consideration, obviously, of principle number one, that we have to do it consistent with our policy objectives as well.  Let me take a few more.  I have a feeling we’re not going to resolve this today.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It includes statements agreeing with previous points and expressing a sense of not being able to solve a particular issue.


Passage number 440.
 MR. HOENIG.  Just quickly, I put time frames in there because everyone knows we’re going to do this in some systematic fashion.  We don’t even have to talk about that.  We don’t even have to put this thing out.  This gives them a concept of what we are thinking about.  And paragraph 7 says, “Of course, we’ll make adjustments if we need to, but here’s what you can look to.”  And it gives them I think more information rather than less.  Keeping it too general is just too general.  It doesn’t provide anything useful.  So that’s why I like “three to five,” and “two to three.”  Let people know, and then we’ll see what happens, obviously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeable statements. The speaker is simply explaining their reasoning for including specific time frames in a document.


Passage number 441.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 442.
 MR. LACKER.  The purpose of the clause in the first sentence of paragraph 6—about minimizing the extent to which the SOMA portfolio might affect the allocation of credit across sectors—is to announce our purpose for getting out of agencies, right.  It’s not about this disruption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for clarification about the purpose of a specific clause.


Passage number 443.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as the word "right" does not provide any context or information to determine if there is disagreement or contention.


Passage number 444.
 MR. LACKER.  Now, you all know I have asked our Manager many times over many meetings about this notion of disrupting the market.  I agree with President Hoenig, it’s unlikely that market participants are going to view us as slacking from our solicitousness about disruption to the market.  It’s kind of a squishy topic, though, and I’ve never really gotten a lot of specifics about what those disruptions mean.  And I was kind of confused by the memo we got about this, because it sounded a lot like the flow effect, which I thought we had cast aside over the course of the first purchase program in preparation for the second.  So I’m still confused about what these disruptions mean.  We’ve done a lot of analysis.  We’ve seen a lot of scenarios.  And in almost all of them, we do it in something like this time period of three to five years.  The staff very kindly threw in some more-rapid scenarios to make me feel good.  I wasn’t able to persuade the rest of you that that was the best policy, so let’s put down what we know.  There are all sorts of things where you could preserve some optionality and degrees of freedom by holding back information.  But this is about clarity.  It’s about helping the markets have some degree of predictability about what we do.  And I’d say, go ahead and put the number in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification about a certain topic, but there is no disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 445.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  For what it’s worth, both of our previous communications and most of our scenario analysis is four to five years.  We haven’t worked with a three-year variant very often.  So if you are willing to accept that, I think that was the original version.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information about previous communications and scenario analysis, and explaining that a three-year variant is not frequently used. There is no argument or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 446.
  MR. LACKER.  Either one would be fine with me.  I think President Dudley is persuasive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker expresses his agreement with President Dudley's persuasiveness.


Passage number 447.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I can live with four to five years.  I just wanted to point out that if we did exit late, we might decide to go faster.  But there’s enough wiggle room here that I don’t think that people are going to produce this five years from now and say, “Well, you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 448.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage does not have enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 449.
 MR. FISHER.  “Three to five” encompasses “four to five,” so, therefore, I would vote for “three to five.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, simply states his agreement with the option "three to five" by explaining that it encompasses the range of "four to five."


Passage number 450.
”  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage only mentions laughter and does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 451.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Well, because everyone is converging, I was going to suggest saying “within five years.”  But if everyone is happy with where they are, then I’m happy with that, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the passage, Mr. Kocherlakota states that he is open to the possibility of extending the timeframe to "within five years" if everyone else is happy with their current progress. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in his statement.


Passage number 452.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage mentioned "Governor Duke" but does not provide any information or context to suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 453.
 MS. DUKE.  I would say, I prefer to have no numbers, but if it meant I didn’t have to discuss this again, I would take anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal preference and willingness to compromise in order to avoid further discussion.


Passage number 454.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That shows a distressing lack of stamina.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a personal opinion about someone's lack of stamina.


Passage number 455.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  This is how labor negotiations always go—wear them down.  [Laughter]  Okay.  So let’s just get a sense here.  First of all, put aside completely for a moment the issue of three to five or four to five years—is everybody okay with the other changes that were made.  Is there anyone who has strong objections to any of the other changes.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The presence of laughter suggests that the tone is light and relaxed, and there is no indication of any strong objections to the changes.


Passage number 456.
 MS. RASKIN.  Just on the “up or down.”  I don’t think it’s hugely problematic, but anytime we talk about adjustments, we don’t say “up or down.”  Just here we talk about adjustments “up or down.”  So the question is:  When we are silent as to “up or down,” does it suggest only one way.  Are we leaning a certain way on this particular adjustment in number 5 because we’ve indicated “up or down,” whereas in number 4, we have referred to adjustments without saying “up or down”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MS. RASKIN is simply raising a question and seeking clarification about the use of the phrase "up or down" in different scenarios.


Passage number 457.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think in this case you could imagine circumstances in which it could go either way.  In other cases, we’ve been leaning more in one direction than the other.  I don’t think this is a critical issue, but I take your point.  Anyone else.  [No response]  All right.  I’m going to ask, how many prefer “three to five,” how many prefer “four to five,” and how many prefer no numbers.  And then, based on that, we’re going to come back to you to try to develop some kind of consensus based on some more staff work, if that’s okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 458.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Is the idea to include it in the minutes, if we can get to closure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "if we can get to closure" suggests that there is contention or disagreement regarding whether or not the idea should be included in the minutes.


Passage number 459.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, if we can get to closure.  Yes.  Even if we can get to closure after the meeting, that would be good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement suggests a desire for closure, and the following comment supports that idea.


Passage number 460.
 MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman, can I ask a question, though.  Picking up on Betsy’s theme, to the degree that the inclusion of a number is very important to a couple of people and others of us are somewhat indifferent, or at least don’t feel strongly about it, it would be important to know whether people might vote “no” if there were no number in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Tarullo is simply asking a question and expressing the importance of understanding the opinions of others regarding the inclusion of a number.


Passage number 461.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Is there anyone who strongly objects to the inclusion of any numbers.  President Fisher, I think you have noted your concerns.  Okay, good.  Now, there is a legitimate question of “three to five” and “four to five.”  How many are in favor of “three to five”.  Don’t raise your hand too high, Jeff.  [Laughter]  [Show of hands]  Let’s see—three to five” it is.  So we have a document that everybody is at least willing to buy into.  Is everybody okay with posting this in the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 462.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman, what about the other—is it “two to three” or “about three”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on a numerical value and asking for confirmation.


Passage number 463.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That follows from the “three to five.” “Three to five” implies “two to three.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That follows from the 'three to five'" suggests that the information being discussed can be derived from the concept of "three to five." Additionally, the next statement clarifies that the implication of "three to five" is "two to three," indicating a progression or relationship between the two concepts. Overall, there is no conflict or disagreement expressed in this passage.


Passage number 464.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And we’re putting in “once sales begin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This sentence is simply stating a fact without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 465.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Once sales begin,” yes.  Okay.  Any objection to putting this in the minutes.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking if there are any objections to recording the statement in the minutes.


Passage number 466.
 MR. BULLARD.  I am opposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage provided is incomplete and does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 467.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  The next meeting is August 9.  I hope everybody has a good summer. A couple of points.  As you know, the press conference is at 2:15.  There is a screen over here in the Special Library for anyone who wants to take advantage of that.  Like last time, I’m going to be mostly focused on reviewing the projections, including the interpretation of the longer-term projections for unemployment and inflation and a link to today’s policy decision.  I will follow closely the language of the statement and the material in the projections. For your information, we’re trying to provide the opportunity for media coverage to actually present in real time the projection table and chart.  We’re now going to release those materials at 2:00, rather than 2:15, to give the TV people and so on a few minutes to be prepared to present the materials simultaneously with the press conference.  The table is the one we normally release and the chart is the one you saw yesterday with more of a fan chart look that shows the range and the central tendency. And, separately, as we mentioned yesterday, the minutes release will be moved up one day, because otherwise it would come in the middle of my monetary policy testimony. Is lunch ready.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is giving information about upcoming events and making announcements, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 468.
 MS. DANKER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without any contextual information, it is not possible to determine whether there is any contention or disagreement in the given passage. The given statement does not provide enough information to make a definitive judgement.


