Passage number 1.
  Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on April 26–27, 2011  April 26 Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Welcome to the marathon FOMC meeting.  [Laughter]  Thank you for accommodating the early start.  As you know, we have an extra go-round today.  I hope this will not be the norm, but we’ll just have to see how things evolve. Given the topics this morning, I thought we would make this a joint FOMC–Board meeting, and so I need a motion to close the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 2.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "So moved" indicates agreement or approval.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Without objection.  Let’s begin, as usual, with financial developments and open market operations, and I’ll turn to Brian Sack.  Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and proceeding with the discussion, assigning a task to Brian Sack.


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Brian.  One other vote that we will be requesting is the ratification of foreign exchange transactions over the intermeeting period.  So I thought I would just say a word about the intervention that the Federal Reserve participated in with respect to the yen. As you know, the FOMC delegates to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee—the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the FOMC and Vice Chair of the Board—the authority to authorize interventions if they are sufficiently small and if time does not permit consultation with the full Committee.  I think both of those conditions were easily met.  As you know, we haven’t intervened for more than a decade, but following the earthquake and tsunami, there were some quite extraordinary circumstances.  The Japanese called the G-7, cited large moves in the yen in relatively illiquid trading conditions, and asked for us to participate in a joint intervention.  I think there was some basis for their concerns about the foreign exchange market, but I think the response of their colleagues was more about solidarity for the courage that they were showing under extreme circumstances.  So under the leadership of Treasury Secretary Geithner and the other G-7 leaders, we agreed to participate in an intervention. It was a very short time lag; the time between the call when the Japanese made the request and the actual intervention announcement was less than two hours, so there was really not time to consult.  The amount involved was very small—$500 million from the Fed, $500 million from the Treasury—with most of the intervention being done by the Bank of Japan.  There was no commitment to any additional action, and I don’t expect any, barring some major unanticipated developments.  This appears to have met the criteria set forward by the Committee, but I wanted just to add that in case there are any questions or comments on that subject. Now let me open the floor for questions for Brian on his presentation or anything on the foreign exchange market.  Any questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about a recent intervention that the Federal Reserve participated in with respect to the yen.


Passage number 5.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, a couple of questions for Brian.  If the debt ceiling is resolved on time, have you been in conversations with the Treasury about the pace at which the Supplementary Financing Program will be reinstated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a question being asked to Brian about his conversations with Treasury regarding the pace of the Supplementary Financing Program reinstatement.


Passage number 6.
 MR. SACK.  We have not been in active discussions about that, given the uncertainties about the debt ceiling.  I think there is general agreement that the SFP could be brought back up to its previous size with a sufficient increase in the debt ceiling.  But no, we haven’t had detailed conversations about it recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing a lack of discussions and agreement on a specific topic, namely the size of the SFP and its relation to the debt ceiling.


Passage number 7.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  My second question has to do with MBS sales.  In discussing the Treasury sales, you noted the large difference between the magnitude of our holdings and the magnitude of their sales and holdings.  And you said that Fed sales, because they would involve such a large amount, could have implications for market pricing and market functioning.  In preparing for this meeting, I looked at the November transcript where I asked you about the pace of our purchases, and what sort of factors you thought would motivate limiting the pace of our purchases.  You said essentially two things:  One was operational capabilities, and the other was the potential for affecting market functioning.  You were careful to distinguish between the pricing effect, which, as you noted, was presumably the desired effect of the policy, and what you called market liquidity.  And what you described was that we didn’t want to create too much of a one-sided market by buying too much, resulting in lower trading volumes between other parties and higher bid-asked spreads and all. So going in the other direction and selling things, do you think about the effect on market functioning the same way.  I mean, it’s unlikely to result in a one-sided market, right.  We are putting more things out there, and a lower trading volume seems unlikely because there is going to be more float out there.  How do you think about the potential market-functioning effects, apart from the pricing effects.  The broad motivation for this question, obviously, is, how fast could we conceivably think about selling our assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and asking for the other person's opinion.


Passage number 8.
 MR. SACK.  I think about the market-functioning aspects in many of the same ways—though maybe not entirely.  I think rapid sales could be difficult for the market to digest and could result in a one-sided market where dealers have more trouble making markets and where other participants are less inclined to participate, given the heavy flow coming from one single seller.  So I think the same concerns would apply if we are talking about a pace of sales that’s very high.   One thing we’ve learned from the Treasury decision, though, is that the pace that they have set out, of up to $10 billion a month, seems to have been fairly easily digested so far. It does not seem to be raising any problems with market functioning.  And $10 billion a month is not a lot of net supply relative to the history of the MBS market.  In the early 2000s, there was $200 billion to $300 billion of net supply coming to the market each year—something on the order of $20-some billion a month.  There is not much net supply coming from fundamentals today, so the Treasury adding their $10 billion to net supply hasn’t been too disruptive. There’s one difference:  When you are selling assets out of your portfolio, these are seasoned securities, or what are called specified pools; they’re not the production securities in the TBA market.  We had a little bit of uncertainty about gauging whether $10 billion was a lot or not, because these were seasoned securities, but I think what we have learned from the Treasury program is that the market has been able to digest that.  The concerns about market functioning, I think, would apply if the Committee were to consider much more rapid paces of MBS sales than $10 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and observations about the market-functioning aspects of rapid sales and the impact on market participants. They also mention the Treasury program and its pace of sales, which they consider to be easily digested by the market. There is no opposing viewpoint presented in this passage.


Passage number 9.
 MR. LACKER.  Can I follow up, Mr. Chairman.  I want to learn more about this concern about market functioning.  The way I thought about your comments in November was that—for the standard market microstructure model—marketmakers commit some capital based on expected returns and expected deal flow.  If we are buying a lot, I can see why the market would shrink and the number of marketmakers ought to shrink.  But my intuition about flipping that around and applying it to a situation where we are selling would be that the number of marketmakers would increase and spreads would fall.  Do you have some other model in mind, or am I missing something in applying the standard model to this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is seeking clarification and asking for more information to better understand the concern about market functioning. He is specifically asking if there is a different model in mind or if he is missing something in applying the standard model.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 10.
 MR. SACK.  Yes, I do.  As I said, I have many of the same concerns with market functioning in terms of selling.  But I agree with you, it is not the same, and there are some things that are asymmetric.  In terms of the available float, tradable float to the market, that’s very different.  When we were buying very actively, we were removing a lot of the tradable float, and that was likely impairing market liquidity.  And, of course, when we’re selling, we are providing supply to the market that it can trade.  However, as I mentioned, we are not selling the most actively traded TBA securities in the market.  We will be selling these more seasoned, more specific pools, which may limit that benefit to some degree. The concern I was raising was that, if the market thought that there was a single seller who would be in very aggressively, and maybe unpredictably, it would be harder for marketmakers to make markets and provide liquidity to the market.  So it is the uncertainty, I would say, about what the effect of a very aggressive sales program would be that would limit market functioning.  But I want to emphasize that this would be at paces well above what the Treasury decided upon.  We think that there is some room to sell at a decent pace without causing significant market disruption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are some differences and asymmetries in market functioning when buying and selling. They also mention concerns about market liquidity and the potential impact of a very aggressive sales program. However, they emphasize that the Treasury's decided upon pace of selling would not cause significant market disruption.


Passage number 11.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  You took pains to reduce the uncertainty about the pace of our purchases, and I’m assuming you did the same thing for the sales, too.  So the uncertainty around our sales can’t be large, can it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging and assuming that the uncertainty around the sales cannot be large, based on the efforts made to reduce uncertainty about the pace of purchases.


Passage number 12.
 MR. SACK.  Well, I think that would depend on what the FOMC communicated.  And then, given what the FOMC has communicated, we would decide if there were additional details for the Desk to communicate.  But I agree that communicating about the sales strategy would help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the idea of communicating about the sales strategy, stating that it would depend on what the FOMC communicated and if there were additional details for the Desk to communicate.


Passage number 13.
 MR. LACKER.  That seems like a price effect—that they’re uncertain where the price is going to be, as we are—and that seems like a policy consideration as opposed to market functioning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement of agreement between the speakers regarding the relationship between price uncertainty and policy considerations.


Passage number 14.
 MR. SACK.  Of course, in addition to the market-functioning aspects, as policymakers, you will also worry about the market-pricing effect, because we would assume that more-rapid sales programs would put upward pressure on long-term interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 15.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker expresses gratitude towards the chairman without any conflicting statements or opposing views.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Other questions for Brian.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and simply stating that they have more questions for Brian and President Bullard.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am looking at figure 24, “Expected Spread between IOER Rate and Federal Funds Rate.”  If I’m reading this correctly, IOER goes up and the spread gets larger.  Why is that.  I would think the arbitrage would be the arbitrage, given the fees that are in the market.  So why does the spread go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement or contention. Mr. Bullard is questioning why the spread between IOER rate and Federal Funds Rate increases when IOER goes up, stating that he would expect the arbitrage to counterbalance this increase. There seems to be a difference of opinion or confusion regarding the reasons behind this trend.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 18.
 MR. SACK.  The current level of the spread is constrained by the arbitrage, but it’s also constrained by the zero bound on nominal interest rates, which is presumably limiting the spread that we see.  Let’s say the arbitrage hypothetically required 30 basis points.  We know the fed funds rate wouldn’t go to minus 5, so the zero bound is providing a limit on how big that spread can get.  I think what you are seeing is that, as IOER goes up, that limit goes away, and the spread increases.  Having said all that, at any level of the IOER rate, we think that arbitrage is relevant and does put a cap on how big that spread can be, because if that spread gets too large, firms will come in and do the arbitrage.  So that’s why the spread only rises to 25 basis points, even with such a large amount of reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. One person argues that the spread is limited by the zero bound on nominal interest rates, while the other argues that the spread is limited by the arbitrage and the potential for firms to come in and do the arbitrage.


Passage number 19.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  That makes sense, but then the zero bound is still a factor, I guess, between, say, 1 and 2 percent on the IOER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Bullard discussing the zero bound and the interest rate on IOER.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 20.
 MR. SACK.  Under the story I just told, you would expect the same gap at 1 and 2, and that’s not consistently represented in the table.  For some of the columns, you see that pattern—that the gap widens a lot from 25 basis points to 100 basis points on IOER, and then widens only marginally more as you go to 200 basis points on IOER.  That’s true for all of the columns except for the first one.  So, my guess is that the gap that we will see between market interest rates and the IOER rate could widen as we move up from current levels, but, for the reason you noted, will reach a constant level, a steady-state level, well before the IOER rate gets to 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sack is suggesting that there is inconsistency in the representation of the gap between market interest rates and the IOER rate in the table. He argues that while the gap widens significantly as the IOER rate increases from 25 to 100 basis points, it only marginally widens further as it goes from 100 to 200 basis points, except for the first column. This implies that the gap may reach a steady-state level before the IOER rate reaches 2 percent.


Passage number 21.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing gratitude for something.


Passage number 22.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Kocherlakota without providing any additional information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 23.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question about figure 23.  This represents the primary dealers’ estimates of our draining capacity.  I was wondering what the staff’s own estimates would be of that number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about a figure in a report.


Passage number 24.
 MR. SACK.  This is the draining capacity over a short time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage states a fact about the draining capacity over a short time, and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 25.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  The intermeeting period, a relatively short period of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the intermeeting period is a relatively short period of time.


Passage number 26.
 MR. SACK.  I’ll speak for myself, and maybe not the staff as a whole.  My own impression is that these responses are pretty aggressive, especially on the reverse repo side.  If the mandate were to drain $500 billion of reserves or more, I think it may be prudent to spread that process out a bit more than over one intermeeting period. When we do reverse repurchase agreements, we are taking funding away from dealers and other participants in the market.  So there has to be this change in short-term credit flows because, ultimately, the reserves are going to come out of the banks; it requires a change of how the credit flows.  I think we are unsure about how easily the market adjusts as it moves through that chain, and so I think there is good reason to be gradual and to give the market more time than six weeks to make those adjustments. I think the capacity to ramp up term deposits quickly is perhaps a bit greater than reverse repos because it doesn’t require any re-intermediation of credit.  It’s just a change in the nature of banks’ assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and discussing their uncertainty about the market's ability to adjust to the changes in credit flows. They suggest a gradual approach to give the market more time to make adjustments.


Passage number 27.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  A relabeling, almost.  If I might follow up, I understand your concerns on reverse repos.  What would be your concerns about what kinds of constraints we would face in terms of the use of TDFs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for more information about the concerns regarding constraints on the use of TDFs.


Passage number 28.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think on the term deposits, the question is simply that there’s a lot of uncertainty about the level of reserves that people will provide to us at a given price.  I mean, at a high enough price, we are pretty confident we could drain a lot of reserves, but we don’t know what that supply curve looks like. I think another issue that would suggest that having a little more time would be helpful is that some institutions have not participated thus far in our TDF operations but have suggested that, if this gets serious, they would want to sign up and begin participating.  We would want some time to get the new entrants integrated into the TDF program so that there would be more capacity as they came in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating some uncertainties and potential issues related to term deposits and the TDF program.


Passage number 29.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 30.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 31.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes—a clarification, Brian.  I’m looking at figures 17 and 18 on page 3 about the GC repos and the securities lending.  You made a comment that part of the problem was the lack of Treasury collateral in some of these markets, which helps to explain a little bit of the rise in the securities lending and some of the differences in the repo rates.  Is that related at all to the fact that we are buying most of the Treasuries that are coming out through our purchase plan, and that we are actually making Treasury collateral scarce in doing this exercise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser raises a question or suggests a potential explanation that goes against the previous comment made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 32.
 MR. SACK.  The underlying market conditions coming into the FDIC fee were relevant.  We’ve been conducting asset purchases, and that has left less collateral in the market than it otherwise would have had; at the same time, the Treasury has run down the SFP, which also has taken Treasury collateral out of the market.  So there was a backdrop of less collateral available, but it wasn’t causing significant disruption or problems for the market.  What happened with the FDIC fee was much more of an abrupt shift.  Just to be clear, we had expected the repo rate to move down roughly in line with the federal funds rate for the same reasons that apply to the federal funds rate.  But what happened was that the adjustment was more abrupt.  It seemed that the decision by some market participants not to do the arbitrage—not to fund themselves in the repo market, pulling that collateral out of the market—really made it difficult for the market to adjust in the short term.  I would say that the things you point to provide a backdrop of some shortage but not problems, but then the FDIC fee resulted in a much more abrupt adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there was a backdrop of less collateral available but argues that it did not cause significant disruption or problems for the market. However, the abrupt shift caused by the FDIC fee is seen as more problematic and difficult for the market to adjust to.


Passage number 33.
 MR. PLOSSER.  But if you go to the other panel, with the securities lending, since November there’s been a rather marked increase in securities lending by the Fed.  That’s the background you’re talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about an increase in securities lending by the Fed since November.


Passage number 34.
 MR. SACK.  That is the background I’m talking about, and I think in part that upward trend is related to us taking Treasury securities out of the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion and explanation.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The word "President Fisher" alone does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 36.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I don’t know if the questions are over, but I would like to move that we accept the proposal for the extension of the swap lines from Mexico and Canada and approve the Desk operations as you suggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is making a motion to accept the proposal and approve the suggested Desk operations, indicating agreement with the Chairman's suggestion.


Passage number 37.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  So there are three measures:  open market operations, foreign exchange operations, and the swap agreements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the three measures: open market operations, foreign exchange operations, and swap agreements.


Passage number 38.
 MR. FISHER.  I would like to move acceptance of all three.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a desire to accept all three options.


Passage number 39.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Before we do that, though, let me just make sure—Governor Duke, did you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply confirming if Governor Duke has a question.


Passage number 40.
 MS. DUKE.  I just had one question.  Can you give me a sense of the relative size of the Treasury GC repo market and the current fed funds market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Duke simply asks for information about the relative size of the Treasury GC repo market and the current fed funds market.


Passage number 41.
 MR. SACK.  Yes.  There are different ways to measure this, but one way is to compare average daily volumes among dealers.  For federal funds, we’ve been seeing $40 billion to $50 billion of transactions daily.  For Treasury GC repos, just to the dealers, it’s been $500 billion to $600 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents different ways to measure the transactions and the volumes associated with them. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 42.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It simply shows gratitude by expressing thanks.


Passage number 43.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not mention any specific information or imply any disagreement or contention between individuals or entities. It only mentions the name "President Lockhart," but no context or conflicting viewpoints are presented.


Passage number 44.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Brian, a more general question on your outlook for the effect of the FDIC fee on the repo market.  When we were considering the zero lower bound, we were concerned that there could be a destruction in the infrastructure that would occur over time with professionals leaving because they couldn’t operate at that low level, and then generally that there could be a relationship to IOER and its ability to have the effects we want as we begin to raise it.  Can you generally talk about your concern about whether this fee complicates our life over the longer term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for a general outlook and concern about the effect of the FDIC fee on the repo market.


Passage number 45.
 MR. SACK.  Yes, I can.  There’s been a slight decline in funding activity in these markets as the FDIC fee was imposed, but it’s been fairly modest.  Even at these new prices, it seems like there is active intermediation of credit taking place, and, in that sense, the markets continue to function. Another pressure point, however, is the implications for money market mutual funds.  At this point, essentially, Treasury-only money funds will be operating at a loss, and essentially the fund complexes will likely be subsidizing those funds if they want to continue to offer them.  They may choose to do so.  Many of them feel that these types of funds are an important part of a suite of products that they offer customers.  As repo rates got extremely low, we did have several money funds raise complaints to us about this phenomenon, with at least one indicating that it couldn’t sustain some of its funds beyond the summer at these levels.  So I think what we will do is continue to reach out and listen to that type of anecdotal evidence.  At this point, that was just one fund, but we are going to try to get a sense of how widespread it is.  There’s no doubt that as Treasury repo rates and Treasury bill rates come in, that’s going to put additional pressure on the profit margins of the money funds.  The prime funds still seem quite okay.  There is enough yield pickup as they move into other products that we don’t think at this point that they’re generally under pressure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and observations about funding activity in the market and the implications for money market mutual funds.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  [No response]  All right.  We have a motion on all three of these measures.  Let’s take them one at a time.  Open market operations—can I have a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a request for a second on the motion regarding open market operations.


Passage number 47.
 MS. YELLEN.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only provides a single statement from Ms. Yellen without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 48.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any further questions or comments.  [No response]  Without objection.  Foreign exchange transactions—second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

The phrase "Without objection" implies that there may have been previous objections or disagreement regarding the topic of foreign exchange transactions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 49.
 MS. YELLEN.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The use of the word "Second" indicates that there is another statement or point being made before this one, suggesting a possible difference in opinion or argument.


Passage number 50.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any comments or questions.  [No response]  Without objection.  And, finally, the renewal of the standing swap agreements with Canada and Mexico.  I need a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for any comments, questions, or objections before discussing the renewal of standing swap agreements with Canada and Mexico.


Passage number 51.
 MS. YELLEN.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states the speaker's name and the word "second."


Passage number 52.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any objections, comments.  [No response]  All right.  Thank you. Let’s go on, next, to item 2, Strategies for Removing Policy Accommodation.  A memorandum was distributed from the staff on April 19, and we will begin with Bill Nelson making a presentation.  Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 53.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Bill.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of polite expressions of gratitude and a request for questions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 54.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, in the memo that you circulated earlier, and to some degree in your presentation this morning, there is a hint, but not an explicit statement, of the proposition that the choice between option 1 and option 2, and variants thereon, would be tied, at least, to the relative pace of tightening that we would eventually want to undertake.  Is that a correct inference to draw.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo suggests that there is a hint of a proposition regarding the choice between option 1 and option 2, while Bill's response does not explicitly confirm or support that inference.


Passage number 55.
 MR. NELSON.  I don’t think so.  Just because we calibrated the two options so that they delivered the same amount of monetary tightening, they remove accommodation to the same degree and deliver the same macroeconomic outcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply provides an explanation or clarification regarding the calibration of two options.


Passage number 56.
 MR. TARULLO.  So let me ask this question somewhat differently.  To what degree would the pros and cons of the two options be different depending on whether the Committee’s ultimate choice was a fairly gradual tightening or a fairly rapid tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a question being asked in a neutral manner, seeking information about the potential differences between two options.


Passage number 57.
 MR. NELSON.  I suppose one advantage of option 2, of sales earlier, is that if the Committee felt that it needed to tighten quickly, it would drain reserves more rapidly and thus set up the commencement of tightening of the federal funds rate sooner.  On the other hand, if the Committee felt that it needed to tighten more gradually, it might be reluctant to engage in asset sales earlier because there is a lot of uncertainty about their effect on the economy.  It would seem that at a point when the economy might be on less firm footing, the asset sales might pose greater risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting two different perspectives or considerations regarding the timing of asset sales and the potential impact on the economy. However, they are not contradicting or arguing against each other.


Passage number 58.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is thanking someone named Mr. Tarullo, showing a polite and respectful interaction.


Passage number 59.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  There’s a question from President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or disagreement. It simply states that there is a question from President Lockhart, without indicating any contention or disagreement surrounding it.


Passage number 60.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A question both for Bill and Brian Sack.  I think you suggested that we may want to drain in advance of moving the fed funds rate.  Do you have any sense of how sharp the market reaction would be in long rates to the beginning of draining.  My thoughts:  The market would anticipate that that is a precursor, obviously, to moving the fed funds rate, and there would probably be an immediate reaction.  Is there any way to estimate how much that reaction would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question and a request for an estimate, but there are no opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 61.
 MR. NELSON.  I can’t think of any way to estimate that.  I agree that it would certainly be a communication challenge, if you were to drain and mean it to be just a change in the liabilities on your balance sheet and not the commencement of tightening.  I think people would realize that by draining, you are setting the groundwork for raising the IOER rate and the target federal funds rate.  So I think the market reaction would be sharp, but it would in part depend upon the communications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Nelson, is expressing agreement and stating his understanding of the potential market reaction to draining and the implications it may have for raising interest rates.


Passage number 62.
 MR. SACK.  I would just add, I think most of us would argue that the statement language is a much better vehicle for conveying information to the market about the expected timing of policy action.  And, indeed, one of the reasons that in the memo we put draining after changing “extended period” was just for that reason.  I would argue that, through your communications, you should try to make it clear—if you agree—that the draining patterns aren’t intended to be a signal about the timing of policy tightening because I think the statement is a much clearer signal in that regard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a different approach, but there is no direct disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 63.
 MR. ENGLISH.  But that said, I think the basic point is right—when the market perceives that the Committee is starting in the direction of tightening, they’ll react to that, and you’ll see some effect in markets.  How large or small that is will depend, I think, a great deal on how that is communicated:  what the statement says and, potentially, speeches, press conferences, whatever it is around that.  But it will be a moment when communication will be very important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the importance of communication in relation to the market's reaction to tightening measures by the Committee.


Passage number 64.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It would also depend on what expectations were before that announcement was made.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply suggests that the outcome or interpretation of the announcement would depend on the expectations that were held prior to its announcement.


Passage number 65.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Is there any reason to believe that that reaction will be any different this time than it would be in any other tightening cycle where we reverse.  In most cycles we reverse course at some point.  Is there any reason to believe that’s any more of a concern in this period than in any other period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification or information.


Passage number 66.
 MR. SACK.  I think that in any period, the evolution of expectations of tightening is going to tighten financial conditions in advance of the actual policy tightening.  And in most cycles that would occur exclusively through the FOMC statement, because you wouldn’t have these other steps in the process, such as redemptions or reserve draining and so on.  So I think the ultimate effect on markets is going to depend on the same thing, which is how the expectations of the policy evolve, and it is a matter of managing which policy steps are conveying those signals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage discusses the potential impact of expectations of tightening on financial conditions, and how different policy steps can convey those signals. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 67.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there are other questions without providing any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 68.
 MR. HOENIG.  I have one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or contradictory statements. It appears to be a simple statement or response from Mr. Hoenig without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 69.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 70.
 MR. HOENIG.  Just curious.  Let’s assume for the moment that inflationary pressures become more pronounced and the markets become more convinced that it is perennial if we don’t take an action.  Which of the options— in terms of either moving your funds rate or selling assets at that point —do you think would have the greatest effect on changing expectations about inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a hypothetical question to gather opinions or insights from the other person.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 71.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I guess it is not obvious to me that there would be a big difference between the two.  Either way, if the Committee was clear that it was concerned about inflation, that it was taking steps to tighten policy to address those concerns, I would have thought the communication would be clear, I’m assuming, and the market would react appropriately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. English expresses a disagreement or contention. He is questioning the assumption that the market would definitely react appropriately regardless of how the committee communicates its concerns about inflation and tightening policy.


Passage number 72.
 MR. HOENIG.  Then it wouldn’t matter which option you’d choose—at that point you’d want to move more quickly, right.  So that would push that option forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. Mr. Hoenig is discussing a hypothetical scenario and the statement simply agrees with his point.


Passage number 73.
 MR. ENGLISH.  The steps would come in more rapid succession, I agree, and I think you could do that under either option.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. English, is expressing agreement with the idea that the steps would come in more rapid succession under either option.


Passage number 74.
 MR. SACK.  My own view, though, is that your big gun is the short rate.  So a change in the “extended period” language signaling an earlier, more rapid tightening of short rates, I think, would be your most powerful instrument for tightening financial conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's personal view on the matter.


Passage number 75.
 MR. HOENIG.  Rather than selling the assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a preference or suggestion without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 76.
 MR. SACK.  Right.  And you can see that in the staff’s simulations right now.  At the end of the second quarter when the asset purchase programs finish, the staff estimates about 40 basis points of effect on the term premium from our elevated asset holdings.  So selling the assets more quickly would shrink that effect.  But, of course, you could achieve a lot more tightening than that, if desired, through the path of the short-term interest rate and the signals that you send about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a potential option for achieving tightening through the path of the short-term interest rate and the signals sent about it. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 77.
 MR. HOENIG.  So, you would begin with the repos and so forth to get the rate up more quickly and then allow your balance sheet to run off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Hoenig is stating a strategy or approach without any conflicting ideas or opinions being expressed.


Passage number 78.
 MR. NELSON.  You can drain a considerable amount very quickly with redemptions as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or observation about how redemptions can drain a considerable amount of something quickly.


Passage number 79.
 MR. SACK.  I agree with what Bill and Bill said, that the entire sequence could be shifted and accelerated, but I was answering the question:  Out of all the tools, what do you think the most powerful tool is.  I think we would all agree, it’s still your traditional policy instrument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement with the previous speakers' opinions.


Passage number 80.
 MR. HOENIG.  Okay.  I appreciate that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses appreciation for something.


Passage number 81.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  In a moment we’ll begin a go-round to hear views on these and other issues.  There are some questions that staff provided just as thought starters, but I’m sure you won’t constrain yourselves necessarily.  [Laughter] Let me say a word about what I would like to get out of this.  I will have to discuss this with the press tomorrow, and I would like to provide as much information as I can, but no more than I should.  Certainly, what I will say initially will be that we discussed this issue, that a discussion of the exit process is a separate thing from making the decision to exit, and that it doesn’t necessarily signal any change in our stance; it’s a separate issue.  I want to emphasize the provisional aspects of this—that, as President Hoenig was suggesting, if conditions were different than anticipated, we might want to change the timing, pace, and so on.  It would depend on economic conditions, and then our communication will try to provide as much information as possible about that.  Those will be some general points, but beyond that, if I can get from this discussion some principles—for example, that the interest on excess reserves is the main tool supported by reserve drains, that the balance sheet will be adjusted in certain ways—those obviously would be helpful.  If not, I will just be more general. One final note on this:  The operating framework per se is a big topic and it is not necessarily part of our discussion today, but it does have some bearing potentially on, for example, how quickly we reduce the size of the balance sheet.  For example, if we want to use a floor system, we might not need to reduce the balance sheet as quickly.  To the extent that the operating system bears on this issue, you should feel free to bring that up.  Again, I’ll be taking careful notes, and I hope I can come up with some general principles, which I will then review with you to see if I can get a sense of the Committee from this discussion. Before ending, without trying to preempt the discussion at all, I thought I would make a couple of observations that I found useful in thinking about this.  One is simply that redemptions are a pretty powerful tool here.  If we were to begin redeeming both Treasuries and MBS in December 2011, as assumed by the Tealbook, that would reduce the size of the balance sheet by more than $1 trillion over four years, and we would be back essentially to normal size in four and a half years.  Now, that may be too long for some, but my point is only that that’s the baseline and that redemptions alone do move us in the right direction relatively quickly.  But obviously some may wish to go more quickly than that.  And of course, that doesn’t account for the need to swap around MBS, Treasuries, and so on to get the composition right. The other observation I had that I found useful in thinking about this is that it’s important for us to keep in mind that, in a policy sense, the sales and redemptions of assets and the movements in the interest paid on reserves are substitutes.  To the extent that you do more of one, you have to do less of the other, and as we discuss these policy tools, I think it is important that we not treat them in some sense as independent; they are part of a unified process. With those preliminary observations, I see President Bullard is first, and we can begin our go-round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and observations, and there is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 82.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard, I do have a question about this, which would be very helpful if you would address—one issue about this is the speed.  Is there a speed limit.  If we think that, say, $200 billion of sales is equal to 25 basis points—to take a rough example—then if we were doing 25 and 50 basis point equivalent moves, that might require a very rapid disposition of assets.  So, A, there’s the market absorbency issue, but, B, you talked about politics.  If we were to sell assets that quickly, we would be, I think, more likely to suffer capital losses, which are also not attractive politically.  Do you have any concerns about any speed issues on this approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply asking the president a question and expressing potential concerns about the speed at which assets would be sold.


Passage number 83.
 MR. BULLARD.  On the capital losses issue, I think we have repeatedly and effectively said that we don’t make policy here based on capital gains or losses.  So I think we have been pretty effective on that, and we can defend that part. On the speed issue, I think, again, you have this large balance sheet because this is a way to threaten higher inflation in an environment in which you have zero policy rates, and you can reduce it at a pace that keeps inflation and inflation expectations close to target.  So it seems as if that could be dictated by events.  If you can go faster, you can go faster.  I appreciate that there might also be considerations about absorption.  And, again, even if you aggressively followed my kind of policy, I think you would get to some point where you said, “Okay.  We’re going to have to drain the remaining reserves and start to move the funds rate up because it’s just not enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and acknowledging alternative perspectives, but there is no clear disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 84.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Hoenig.


Passage number 85.
 MR. HOENIG.  Can I ask President Bullard a question.  As you’re describing your strategy, you’re selling out of the portfolio.  Is that what you’re saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Hoenig is simply asking President Bullard a question for clarification about his strategy.


Passage number 86.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 87.
 MR. HOENIG.  And that would have effects, but you wouldn’t actually change the fed funds rate or the interest on reserves—for how long.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a hypothetical scenario and does not involve any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 88.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, it would be a version of option 2, so I’d wait as long as I could, I suppose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Bullard's perspective on a certain matter.


Passage number 89.
 MR. HOENIG.  And conditions would tell you when to make that move—in terms of what.  Inflationary expectations, events, and so forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Hoenig is simply asking for clarification on what conditions would indicate that a move should be made, in terms of factors such as inflationary expectations and events.


Passage number 90.
 MR. BULLARD.  I’d definitely keep an eye on inflation and inflation expectations.  It is possible you could start reducing the balance sheet and you’re really not getting enough bang for your buck out of that, and then you might say, “Okay, we’re going to have to drain reserves,” and bring out the big gun and raise the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is discussing different actions and strategies regarding inflation and the balance sheet, but there is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement presented.


Passage number 91.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply expressing gratitude to the chairman and does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 92.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude to President Lacker.


Passage number 93.
 MR. LACKER.  Can you repeat.  You used a tradeoff number—I just want to make sure I have it right—that a certain number of billion dollars is equivalent to a certain number of basis points.  Was that of the fed funds rate’s worth of easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a clarification question asked by Mr. Lacker to ensure that he understood the previous statement correctly.


Passage number 94.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The staff can correct me.  I believe we’ve viewed $150 billion to $200 billion of securities in our portfolio as being roughly equivalent to 25 basis points.  Is that about right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for confirmation or agreement from the staff regarding their belief about the value of securities in their portfolio.


Passage number 95.
 MR. ENGLISH.  We were saying that the $600 billion purchase program was roughly like a 75 basis point reduction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage presents a statement made by Mr. English, without any indication of disagreement or contention. It simply states a comparison between the $600 billion purchase program and a 75 basis point reduction.


Passage number 96.
 MR. LACKER.  Does it mean if we sold $1.6 trillion it would be like having a 4 percent fed funds rate, leaving the IOR rate at 25 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Lacker asking a question regarding the potential effects of selling $1.6 trillion.


Passage number 97.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You’d be going from minus 4 to 24 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a factual statement and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 98.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We currently have about 200 basis points’ worth of ease coming from securities, according to the staff assessment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a factual point, not expressing or implying any disagreement or contention. It is simply providing information about the amount of ease coming from securities based on a staff assessment.


Passage number 99.
 MR. LACKER.  Attributable to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It only includes a statement of attribution to someone named Mr. Lacker.


Passage number 100.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Attributable to our excess holdings of securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about the reason for something. There is no disagreement or contention implied.


Passage number 101.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  I’m just doing the math.  If we got down to $1 trillion on the balance sheet, if we sold all our assets, that would be the equivalent of 4 percentage points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the math involved in selling all assets on the balance sheet.


Passage number 102.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Two percentage points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Two percentage points" is a statement or fact that does not express any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 103.
 MR. LACKER.  But the market wouldn’t work the same, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be disagreement or contention between Mr. Lacker and another person regarding the functioning of the market.


Passage number 104.
   MR. ENGLISH.  All of these are approximations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "All of these are approximations" is simply providing information and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 105.
 MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman, could I make a comment on that issue.  Again, I don’t think our models are a great guide in this kind of environment.  So I think what you should do is experiment with it and then see, in particular, where inflation and inflation expectations go and that would help dictate the pace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing his opinion and suggesting a course of action, but there is no contradictory viewpoint present.


Passage number 106.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 107.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser, I think you did answer this question, but just so I understand it:  If you’re tying interest rates and asset sales, suppose the Taylor rule says interest rates have to rise by 25 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 108.
  Presumably, you would then actually raise it by 12½ basis points, and then— MR. PLOSSER.  Well, again, that’s where I was talking about the calibration.  If we were comfortable enough with the calibration, you could choose to split the difference, if you will.  I don’t know that I’m as confident about that calibration, but I would be open to discussing that.  The key, I think, is that we tie the two together, so that they’re not two independent decisions that we are making in some way; that’s what I was trying to get at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 109.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions "President Kocherlakota" without providing any information or context. Without more information, it is not possible to determine whether there is any contention or disagreement regarding President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 110.
  I realize, of course, there was no right answer to this question, but—[laughter] MR. PLOSSER.  What really matters is your explanation, Narayana.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement acknowledging that there is no right answer to a question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 111.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m going to be terse on these.  In terms of 4a, I agree with the statement.  Consistent with the view expressed in 4a, I prefer a corridor system to a floor system, ultimately.  There are definitely some economic benefits to the floor system, which research around the System has pointed to, but all in all, I think the benefits are outweighed by its relative unfamiliarity.  I agree with the statement in 4b as well, and I agree with the statement in 4c, except that I always want to be thinking about asset sales and redemptions as being a bundle, a way of reducing the balance sheet as one, so I would talk about asset sales and redemptions being implemented within a framework. Let me close by saying a word about the suggested FOMC statement about raising the fed funds rate target.  This is on page 16 of the exit strategy memo.  These are certainly early days to be talking about this kind of stuff, but there are some subtle governance issues we are going to be facing as we move into our exit strategy here.  The suggested statement includes a reference to the Board of Governors’ action on interest on reserves.  I think including the Board of Governors’ action in the FOMC statement is confusing and potentially problematic from a governance point of view.  I would, instead, make the FOMC statement about the FOMC’s actions.  The Board of Governors can release a separate statement, presumably at the same time, that could read, “Consistent with the FOMC’s change in its target for the fed funds rate, the Board of Governors voted to change the interest rate on reserves to be” whatever it is.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. In the last paragraph, Mr. Kocherlakota disagrees with the suggestion of including the Board of Governors' action on interest on reserves in the FOMC statement. He thinks it is confusing and potentially problematic from a governance point of view. Instead, he suggests making the FOMC statement about the FOMC's actions and having the Board of Governors release a separate statement.


Passage number 112.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Well, our intention here was to follow what was done in the past when there were changes in the discount rate and we were aligning the discount rate with changes in the fed funds target.  We had the FOMC statement and then, at the very bottom of the press release, there were a couple of sentences saying that the Board of Governors had moved the discount rate.  So we were not aiming to do anything new here—just what we thought was the standard procedure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the intention to follow past practices regarding changes in the discount rate.


Passage number 113.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I guess what I’m thinking is, maybe we should be doing something new, given the novelty of the situation.  That’s all I’m suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply suggesting a new approach due to the unique circumstances.


Passage number 114.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 115.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.  This is a question both to you, Mr. Chairman, and Narayana.  If we think about sales and the IOER–federal funds rate as substitutes, let’s suppose the Taylor rule says that the funds rate ought to be 2 percent.  Assuming that these are really substitutes, if we haven’t sold assets—and let’s just say there’s 200 basis points of ease within the portfolio—that means we need to set the IOER at 4 percent.  That means if we don’t sell, we are going to have to be raising rates faster than we might otherwise choose to do in that environment.  Am I understanding that correctly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking confirmation and understanding from the chairman and Narayana regarding the relationship between sales, IOER, and the federal funds rate.


Passage number 116.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That is a correct interpretation of what “perfect substitutes” would mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the interpretation given about "perfect substitutes."


Passage number 117.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 118.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Whew, I’m glad I passed that test.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is expressing relief and satisfaction at passing a test.


Passage number 119.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And by the same token, if you sell, then you can delay the increase in the fund rate.  I would point out, just as a factual matter, that if we begin a redemptions process in December of this year, for example, that 200 basis points is going to shrink away pretty quickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any direct disagreement or contention. It consists of statements and observations related to selling and the potential impact on the fund rate.


Passage number 120.
  MR. PLOSSER.  Well, over four years, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Well, over four years, right" is a neutral response or clarification seeking confirmation or clarification. It does not express disagreement or contention with the previous statement or speaker.


Passage number 121.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  I asked the staff to look at this, and because of the anticipation of a declining balance sheet, even though they estimate that there is a 200 basis point effect as of the fourth quarter of 2010, by the fourth quarter of 2012—that is, a year and a half from now—that would be down to 70 basis points just from redemptions.  So that part will get smaller over time, even if we just do redemptions.  And part of that is because it depends not just on the size, but on the expected path of sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the staff's estimation and projections regarding the anticipated impact on the balance sheet.


Passage number 122.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Plosser.


Passage number 123.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Are we ready for President Fisher.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 124.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 125.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It likely contains factual information or objective statements that do not invite disagreement or debate.


Passage number 126.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, would like to commend the staff on their memo.  It was very helpful in thinking about many of the practical issues involved in implementing an exit strategy.  I think these are very difficult issues.  I have been listening to each person who has gone before me, and I completely agree with the importance of flexibility and with the principles that should be guiding the policy.  Many of the thoughts that people have already expressed I agree with, although I come to slightly different conclusions.  I am actually, in the end, going to be closer to President Kocherlakota in my views, but I think these are very fine differences, and these are just difficult issues in terms of communication.  I think we have to recognize that going forward. In approaching the questions, I too found it useful to focus on what I thought of as the underlying principles of what we’re aiming to do.  To me, the most important consideration in designing our exit strategy is to get the timing right in terms of the macroeconomic objectives that we have.  Obviously, we have the long-run objective of normalizing our balance sheet.  But in terms of the details of sequencing, I think that saying when to begin redemptions or drain reserves or exactly how this is structured should not obscure or hinder our pursuit of the appropriate policy stance. Now, in thinking about the different choices, I think the evidence shows that the effects of the LSAPs depend on the expectations of the future size and composition of our balance sheet.  That’s where I start from in terms of thinking about how this works.  I view reducing the size of our balance sheet as working through the same basic channels on the economy as increases in the funds rate, and I see these as being substitutes in terms of the macroeconomy.  I also agree with President Kocherlakota’s point that both redemptions and sales affect the size of our balance sheet, and I tend to think of those together as opposed to separately.  However, there are some critical differences that make these instruments imperfect substitutes in practice.  They have already been mentioned.  I’ll briefly go through two of them.  Although our recent experience has provided us with a much better understanding of the effects of the LSAPs than we had just a few years ago, there is still a great deal of uncertainty around these effects.  I think the uncertainties about the effects of changing LSAPs far exceed those of comparable movements in the fed funds rate, and this high degree of uncertainty suggests, per the Brainard conservatism principle, that we should follow a cautious and gradual approach to changing the balance sheet going forward. Second, compared with the fed funds rate, the public still has limited experience and understanding regarding the use of the balance sheet as a policy instrument.  This suggests that an active use of the balance sheet, as suggested in option 2, would face greater communication challenges and risks of confusing markets, compared with using the funds rate as our principal policy instrument.  These considerations, along with the operational constraints, in terms of the maximum size of asset sales, argue for a steady path of reducing our balance sheet that is preannounced and well communicated.  I don’t like the word “deterministic” because it obviously could change in response to conditions.  But there should be a relatively high hurdle to modifying the path.  I think this approach leaves the fed funds rate as a primary instrument of adjusting the stance of policy either up or down in response to change in economic conditions. This brings me to another consideration in sequencing the exit strategy:  the fact that the short rate is currently constrained by the zero lower bound.  To me, this argues for holding off on shrinking our balance sheet until the short rate is well away from the zero bound so that we have the needed flexibility to add accommodation through a rate cut if economic conditions warrant.  Again, I’m thinking that the fed funds rate is the primary instrument that you move up and down in response to a change in conditions.  So, in this way, I think I would prefer to begin the process of shrinking the balance sheet, both in terms of redemptions and in terms of sales, only after we have instituted a few rate hikes, as envisioned in option 1. Let me go through the specific questions quickly.  On number 1, again, I’ve viewed redemptions in the same way as asset sales, so I would actually prefer to hold off on any reinvestments until after we raise the funds rate.  On number 2, I prefer a path of asset sales that is preannounced and well communicated.  And on 3, my view is that we want to lift off the zero lower bound first in order to regain the flexibility to use that instrument as appropriate before we begin asset sales.  On number 4, I thought that was an apple pie question, and I’m all for apple pie, so I agree with all of the statements in number 4.  [Laughter]  I am in favor of eventually returning to an all-Treasuries portfolio with a corridor operating framework.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses agreement with many of the points made by previous speakers and acknowledges that their views are similar to President Kocherlakota's. The speaker also provides their own perspective on the timing and sequencing of the exit strategy, but this does not involve disagreement or contention.


Passage number 127.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Just for my notes, you said to begin the redemption process after raising rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 128.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 129.
 WILLIAMS.  And basically thinking of it symmetrically with asset sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a perspective or point of view.


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  It’s 12:30 p.m.  I understand that lunch is ready.  Why don’t we recess until 1:00 p.m., bring our lunch back here, and we will still be eating at 1:00, but we’ll just recommence the meeting at that point.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a plan to recess for lunch and then resume the meeting afterwards, and the response is a polite "Okay. Thank you." There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 131.
 [Lunch break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence our meeting.  We will continue with President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The suggestion to recommence the meeting and continue with President Lacker is an agreement among the participants.


Passage number 132.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My preferred strategy for removing policy accommodation, like several others of you, would involve using the funds rate target supported by movements in the interest rate on reserves as the primary instrument of monetary policy.  I think asset sales should begin quickly, and I’d advocate that they should proceed at a pace that’s significantly more rapid than any of the options shown in the staff’s memo.  I think that at approximately the rate at which we purchased assets is a good benchmark.  The pace of sales should be more or less predetermined, and while we should reserve the right to alter the pace in light of incoming information, I think as President Williams said, the bar for such alterations should be set on the high side.  I’ll explain my preferences before I touch on the four “Exodus” questions. Our asset purchase program was designed to address problems in credit markets and to ease monetary policy, with short-term interest rates at their lower bound.  Credit markets seem to be functioning reasonably well right now, and the zero bound doesn’t interfere with using interest rates to remove policy accommodation. The arguments for using asset holdings as a policy tool, thus, aren’t symmetric, and they have less force when interest rates are rising.  So for me, our large-scale asset sales program—and I’m assuming we’re going to refer to this as the LSAS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their preferred strategy for removing policy accommodation and outlining their reasoning behind it.


Passage number 133.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You heard it here first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "You heard it here first" suggests that the information being presented is new or exclusive, but it does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 134.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  For me, the LSAS should be designed primarily to return our portfolio to normal as rapidly as possible and to help facilitate, as best we can engineer it, the use of the federal funds rate target as a policy instrument, and not to use our sales program to make short-term, contingent adjustments to monetary conditions. Now, it is true that heroic work has been done by the New York Fed staff and others as well to try to estimate the term structure effects of LSAPs, but I think we should be careful not to place too much weight on those estimates.  They’re not very precise, and the identification assumptions are open to serious questions.  As a result, I don’t think they provide a really strong, reliable basis for using the LSAS as a substitute for interest rate policy or constructing a policy menu in which asset sales trade off against interest rate increases. As I said, I think asset sales should occur at a relatively rapid pace—specifically, about the same pace at which we purchased assets, around $100 billion a month.  I see several reasons for doing so.  First, I haven’t heard any objections or any convincing stories or theories or evidence about how a well-communicated program of sales would impede market efficiency.  I am sure that the more rapidly we sell things, the more rapidly prices might fall or adjust, but I think we’ve all come around to the stock view rather than the flow view.  Price effects, I think, are separate from the efficiency effects that I was discussing with the System Open Market Account Manager earlier. Second, I see high levels of reserve balances as exacerbating the uncertainty about the effects of our policy rate on the economy, and this is evident in the Desk survey.  It showed significantly more variation in what the average view of the spread would be with high balances than with low balances, and I would assume that the uncertainty around those estimates is larger for high balances than for low balances as well.  I think high reserve balances are likely to push down other interest rates relative to the interest rate on reserves, and as the Manager said, the zero bound undoubtedly limits that effect; I don’t think we have a good sense of just how strong that limiting effect is.  So it seems likely that the magnitude of the effect of high reserve balances on other rates relative to the IOER is going to be different; it’s going to change as we increase the interest rate on reserves.  Related to policy uncertainty is that I think the high level of reserves amplifies the ever-present risk associated with ex post policy mistakes.  With $1½ trillion of excess reserves, banks essentially have many months of rapid loan growth that’s prefunded, and they could draw on that if they view lending opportunities as evolving more favorably.  Now, this would quickly become apparent, of course, but I don’t think we can rule out the idea that inflation expectations would become unhinged simultaneously with an explosion in lending. Another reason I prefer a rapid pace of asset sales is to get us out of the credit allocation business.  This obviously has the most force with the MBS.  Our MBS purchases were unique; they were exceptional and motivated by an assessment that the functioning of those markets was in some sense impaired.  Whatever one’s view about that assessment of market functioning, those unique and exceptional circumstances clearly have passed, and I think we should acknowledge as much by selling those assets quickly.  One way to drain reserves without having to rapidly reduce our asset holdings is for us to issue our own short-term debt, and I want to acknowledge the hard work the staff has done to design, build, and test systems for conducting reverse repos and selling term deposits.  But I think these are very unattractive tools, and I strongly oppose using them.  Issuing new short-term debt in order to reduce reserve balances and in order to avoid having to sell longer-term debt to effect a similar reduction in reserve balances constitutes a really excessive fine tuning of our intervention across the term structure.  It sets the precedent of essentially running a hedge fund, issuing—that is to say, shorting—some securities in order to go long on some other securities.  This is more credit allocation to the extent that we use this to avoid having to sell MBS.  And if it’s Treasuries we’re avoiding selling, this amounts to offsetting the term structure of the debt issued by the Treasury.  Either role strikes me as fundamentally inappropriate for an independent central bank.  We should issue monetary liabilities funded by a broad, evenly weighted portfolio of Treasuries and leave it at that.  I understand that it’s possible market rates will not track the IOER closely if we raise interest rates before asset sales have made much of a dent in the balance sheet, but if this occurs, let’s accelerate asset sales rather than issue our own debt. Let me briefly address the four questions.  Should our first step be to stop reinvesting MBS proceeds.  I say yes. Should we stop reinvesting Treasury proceeds.  Here we’re asked to think about reinvesting Treasury proceeds or not, and I prefer to think of this in terms of the size and composition of our balance sheet.  Given a path for the size of our balance sheet, how do we want to achieve that.  My preference is for a corner solution in which, for any given reduction in asset holdings, we achieve it through MBS sales, and under that principle, the next step after halting MBS reinvestments would be to sell MBS rather than stop reinvesting the Treasury proceeds. Should asset sales be predetermined or preannounced or highly contingent.  As I’ve said, and with due respect to others like President Plosser who have argued for a more contingent approach, I would prefer a relatively predetermined pace.  Of course, nothing we do is predetermined, but I’d envision the funds rate being our main tool and there being a fairly high bar for deviating from a preannounced pace of sales. Should we start selling before or after we raise the funds rate.  I’d prefer to move fairly quickly in winding down our balance sheet.  I think we ought to move quickly toward selling assets along the LIFO lines that President Bullard and others have suggested and sell them at a fairly rapid pace, barring some unforeseen dramatic worsening in the outlook. So, question 4, do you agree with each of the following statements.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker disagrees with using the LSAS as a substitute for interest rate policy or constructing a policy menu in which asset sales trade off against interest rate increases. They also disagree with using reverse repos and selling term deposits as tools to drain reserves.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about President Pianalto or any contention or disagreement surrounding them.


Passage number 136.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also want to compliment the staff on the background memos and an excellent summary of the options for the exit strategy.  I found them to be quite helpful. As I look around the table, it appears, as individuals, we look like we’re in pretty good shape, but our balance sheet has put on quite a few pounds.  The staff has given us two paths to weight loss, a gradual path of weaning us off second helpings and bad calories and a more aggressive strategy of balance sheet bariatric surgery.  [Laughter]  Although we don’t have to accept either one of these options in its entirety, I personally prefer option 1 largely as it is laid out in the staff memo.  I favored this option last year, and I still find it to be a framework that is clear and reasonably simple to articulate. I’d like our exit process to appear as familiar and understandable to the public as possible, with the effects that we can reasonably predict from past experience.  Therefore, I’d like short-term interest rates to be our primary policy instrument. Turning to the questions that were provided, in response to question 1 on sequencing our actions to remove policy accommodation, I support beginning the exit process by halting reinvestment of principal payments for agency and Treasury securities.  I prefer to get to an all-Treasuries balance sheet over time, which taken by itself would favor halting only the reinvestment of agency securities.  However, there are other issues to consider, and we could shrink the balance sheet somewhat faster and explain our actions more simply and effectively in this first phase by halting all reinvestments of both agencies and Treasuries.  Next I would begin to increase our fed funds rate target and the IOER. In response to question 2, I would prefer to commence asset sales some time after we begin to increase interest rates.  I would sell agency debt and agency MBS over a five-year period.  I strongly prefer to sell them gradually and on a preannounced path.  I think that a preannounced path would help to minimize market concerns about surprise asset sales.  That approach would also reinforce a focus on short-term interest rates as our primary policy instrument.  I’m not in favor of tying asset sales to changes in the economic outlook unless the outlook were to shift significantly.  By putting our asset sales in the background, we can again better focus the public on our adjustments to the fed funds rate and the IOER. In response to the third question, as I said, I do prefer to sell assets some time after increasing the fed funds rate.  I don’t place a high priority on rapidly reducing the size of our balance sheet.  Instead, I envision us operating for some time with total reserve balances in excess of what would be required in a mature interest rate–targeting framework, even though we would be shrinking the balance sheet over the intermediate term through redemptions and passive asset sales.  As we shrink our balance sheet through asset sales, I would put greater priority on reducing our holdings of agency securities than Treasuries.  As the economy strengthens and we renormalize policy, we should return to the bedrock principle of Treasuries-only that we’ve followed in the past. I agree with the statements listed under question 4.  I would make one clarification to the third statement because, as I said, I would adjust the pace of asset sales only if there’s a significant change in the economic outlook.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of personal preferences and opinions by Ms. Pianalto regarding the options and strategies for the exit strategy.


Passage number 137.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Evans.


Passage number 138.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the staff for a couple of very nice memos, which were very helpful in thinking about these issues. I find that I can’t completely separate my current assessment of appropriate monetary policy in discussing the exit strategies here, but I’ll try to do that.  I think it is important that however we go about approaching this, we want to continue to focus on our policy goals and the loss function that we’ll be facing and make the appropriate choices in that way.  With that in mind, a couple of the—“principles” is too strong a word, but—things that I’m thinking about are that I favor an approach that allows for considerable patience in our initial steps toward tightening.  I think we want to have the opportunity that, if we start embarking upon this and things happen differently than we are expecting with the economy and inflation, we haven’t committed ourselves to a path that is too difficult.  We want to maintain flexibility, and we want to have flexibility in both directions because, again, things can happen.  We want to maintain optionality in each direction.  Now, fortunately, I think that both of the options described in the staff memos can allow for this flexibility, and I simply point to the fact that they have calibrated options 1 and 2 to have about the same amount of policy restraint imposed along the way.  So I don’t find myself in wild disagreement with either approach. I do continue to modestly favor option 1, which would entail increasing the federal funds rate before we embark on asset sales, but the way that I tend to think about monetary policy is perhaps a little too simplistically, given the complexities that we have right now.  I tend to think of it in terms of the single dimension of our policy restraint, and I think I can map a lot of what you’re talking about into that dimension. I do worry a little bit when we talk about how the funds rate is a familiar tool, we’ve used it before, and everybody understands that.  I think that’s certainly true when we’re able to put pressure on reserves the way we always have in the past.  But as soon as we start wondering about whether or not our reserve draining tools will actually be as effective as we think and whatnot, we’re going to be relying on arbitrage between interest on excess reserves and the funds rate.  And while in theory that should work, in practice I’m not quite sure how all that will play out.  If we find that we start off on that path and, it is not working out, there will be credibility risks, but at any rate, that’s the approach I favor. On the four questions, yes, I think the first step should be to stop reinvesting.  I think of this more in terms of the signaling effect that we get from that because of the unique feature of redemptions versus sales.  I think the Treasuries could be reinvested if the balance sheet, the size of it and its composition, was satisfactory, along the lines that President Lacker was suggesting.  We ultimately want to end up with a Treasury balance sheet, and so if that works, that’s fine. In terms of actively varying the pace of asset sales, that’s not my first choice.  I would use the reserve draining tools.  But if the state of monetary policy required a quicker restraint, then we’d want to consider upping asset sales faster.  Ultimately, that could be a point of compromise between the different views. In terms of sequencing, I think option 1 is best in my opinion, so that would be sales later—again, making sure that the response to the ultimate stance of monetary policy is really important.  And I agree with all of the last three statements as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker states their personal preferences and opinions regarding monetary policy and the exit strategies, but does not express any disagreement or contention with the ideas presented in the passage. The speaker even mentions that they don't find themselves in wild disagreement with either approach and agree with all of the last three statements.


Passage number 139.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple form of gratitude expressed by President Rosengren.


Passage number 140.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I think about exit strategy, my philosophy would be driven by three guiding principles.  First, tightening occurs when we shrink our balance sheet or raise interest rates.  If we were to choose to shrink the balance sheet in the late fall, as in the Tealbook, that would, in effect, be our first monetary policy tightening, even though the federal funds rate would still be at the zero bound.  In my view, the start of any tightening action should be primarily focused on when, looking ahead two to three years, the tightening is needed to prevent us from overshooting our inflation or employment mandate.  Second, returning to more traditional monetary policy is desirable and requires shrinking the balance sheet.  We should shrink the balance sheet in a way consistent with achieving the right macroeconomic outcome.  In the short run, that probably means relying on a floor system.  And third, while returning to an all-Treasury portfolio is a long-term goal, it should not be a short-term goal.  Given the fragility of the housing market, I would not sell any of the mortgage-backed securities until after we have commenced raising short-term interest rates. So how would I apply these principles to the actual sequencing.  Once tightening was appropriate to avoid overshooting on inflation or employment mandates, I would start by allowing mortgage-backed securities to roll off the balance sheet as they matured, which would begin the process of shrinking the balance sheet.  After determining the impact of not reinvesting the proceeds for mortgage-backed securities on long-term interest rates and the economy, and assuming further tightening was appropriate, I would begin allowing both Treasury and mortgage-backed securities to roll off the balance sheet as the securities matured.  If even more tightening was necessary, I would consider selling short-dated Treasury securities, which would reduce our balance sheet more quickly without realizing significant capital losses or having as large an effect on long rates or mortgage-backed securities. If we use a rough rule of thumb that’s a little bit more conservative than what was discussed before—$250 billion in excess reserve reductions as roughly equivalent to a 25 basis point reduction of the federal funds rate—we have roughly six 25 basis point increases in balance sheet reductions.  Should the economy falter, we could slow down redemptions, and if further tightening was appropriate, we could speed up the time we would return to a normalized size for the balance sheet.  Given the natural runoffs in the balance sheet once we begin the redemptions, the balance sheet does begin to shrink relatively quickly if we allow both Treasury and mortgage-backed securities to run off, as the Chairman earlier observed. If even more tightening is necessary before our balance sheet size has normalized, we would begin by raising interest on excess reserves.  Given the Tealbook forecast, I can imagine this would be necessary a year or more after we begin the redemption process.  I would use the interest on excess reserves as our principal short-term interest rate until we had normalized the balance sheet.  After we had normalized the size of our balance sheet and begun raising interest rates, I would commence with sales of mortgage-backed securities.  However, depending on housing conditions, the status of Freddie and Fannie, and our willingness to realize capital losses, I could imagine extending the asset sales to be more gradual and to have an all-Treasuries portfolio by 2020. In terms of the four questions asked, for the first one, I am fine with reinvesting the principal payments from agency securities, but as I just mentioned, I would stagger it.  I would start with mortgage-backed securities and then let the Treasury securities roll off.  The reason I want to shrink the balance sheet is that I have somewhat more uncertainty about how the tools are going to work with large excess balances, so I would actually prefer a strategy that gets our balance sheet to shrink initially, just to have more certainty about how our short-run tools are going to work. In terms of the second question, I think we could conduct it much the way we did the increase in securities.  We would announce a reduction in the balance sheet over a fixed period of time, but it would be conditioned on what the economic outcomes were, and we could change either the time or the amount, but the presumption would be that we wouldn’t change it unless something relatively significant had occurred. In terms of sequencing in the third question, one of the challenges is that sequencing in part does depend on conditions.  So if we’re going to have a very gradual tightening, then a strategy of asset redemption may actually take care of, at least initially, some of the tightening that we would need to do.  If it needs to be more rapid, then we have to include not only asset redemptions, but also the interest on excess reserves going up. And in terms of the three statements in the fourth question, despite all of us having guiding principles that are different, I think we all agree on all three of the statements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states their own perspective and preferences but does not directly address or refute any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 141.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It shows there is constructive ambiguity.  [Laughter]  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is constructive ambiguity, followed by laughter.


Passage number 142.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, would like to thank the staff for their framing of a complex set of issues and tradeoffs.  Before I answer any questions, I’d like to express some preliminary views. First, as others have said, I see the endgame as a return to a balance sheet configuration that aligns with more-normal conduct of monetary policy and has the best chance of effectiveness in shaping economic conditions consistent with our mandates.  I see that configuration as all-Treasuries, scaled at a level that supports the use of the fed funds rate target as the central policy instrument operating within a corridor structure. To some extent, removal of accommodation will effectively begin with an announcement effect resulting from our first communication about exit.  I think it is possible with good communication to limit the announcement effect on the announcement of ceasing reinvestments, and I think we may be able to limit an announcement effect even with the initiation of small asset sales, but this will require skillful communication, and it seems to me that the timing would best coincide with the Chairman’s press conferences so that he can explain that a rise in the fed funds rate is not necessarily imminent. The unknown of the announcement effect associated with the first step may be an argument for not taking this action too far in advance of the decision to implement the full exit plan.  I think the objective should be that any substantial announcement effects on long rates would occur when we have decided to actively begin removal of accommodation and not before.  Said differently, I’d place a high priority on avoiding any actions that inadvertently cause policy tightening to begin before the Committee has arrived at a consensus that tightening is warranted by economic conditions.  Because in my view we will be in new territory in unwinding the policy actions of the last three years, I prefer an approach that recognizes that there are a number of unknowns.  This in my mind argues for a simple and conservative plan that minimizes the risks of market distortions and can be relatively easily communicated.  I would favor an accelerated pace of asset sales only to the extent that policy effectiveness and market function are not put at risk. With those preliminary comments, let me give answers to the four questions.  For question 1, I agree that the first step should be stopping reinvestment of principal payment of agency securities, and I would also stop reinvestment of Treasuries at that time. For question 2, along with the question of starting the cessation of some or all reinvestments comes the question of when.  My thinking is that we would stop reinvestment when the Committee agrees that conditions have evolved to the point that any notion of QE3 can be taken off the table.  I favor a predetermined and announced-in-advance path for asset sales.  There may be some learning involved as the asset sales proceed, so my preference would be for an approach that is relatively conservative in terms of the pace of sales.  As I said, I do not view a quick reduction of the balance sheet as an end in itself.  I would not want to implement sales at a pace that would add a lot of de facto tightening beyond what we intend with interest rate policy.  I think it will be possible to communicate a predetermined asset sales program and at the same time convey that the program could be revised or halted if conditions dictate. For question 3, I would prefer to start asset sales simultaneously with beginning to move the fed funds rate and the interest rate on excess reserves.  Given the unknowns, I’m wary of too much sequencing and too many moving parts that have to be coordinated.  In my thinking, when the Committee decides it’s time to move, all the wheels are set in motion. I agree with the thrust of the statements in question 4.  In some respects, I think the exact process we use to remove policy accommodation is less important than our communications about the timing, magnitude, and conditionality of our planned actions.  I would not want any early communications on a framework to impact private expectations in such a way that we end up with a de facto removal of accommodation before we make the decision to change the policy stance. To summarize, the approach I would recommend tries to achieve simplicity and the least risk, and it’s really a two-step approach.  At a point not long before active exit, we cease reinvestment of both MBS and Treasuries.  Then, simultaneously, we raise the interest on reserves rate and the fed funds rate target, and begin a gradual, orderly, preannounced program of asset sales.  We leave to the Desk the decision on draining operations as a tactical move to improve the ability to hit the fed funds rate target, and we communicate that the pace of sales will be reviewed periodically in light of economic conditions.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's views and preferences regarding the process of unwinding the policy actions of the past three years.


Passage number 143.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you. President Hoenig" simply expresses gratitude towards President Hoenig without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 144.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A couple of people around the table have mentioned 1937, and I think it’s an interesting comparison and one we should keep in mind.  I think it was in that period that we have some similarities to today.  There were efforts to increase taxes and concern about excess reserves that were sloshing around, and I think we doubled reserve requirements overnight, which caused a major shock to the economy.  And I certainly would agree that we do not want to shock the economy.  And I don’t think we’re going to double reserve requirements—I certainly hope not—or take actions that would move us in that direction. The second thing I want to observe is that, as we deal with this exit strategy, I think we will be adjusting it as we learn because whether you like the definition of “perfect substitutability” or not, we have no idea what the substitutability is between our fed funds rate moves and our removal of the sizable assets on our balance sheet.  So it’s going to be a careful learning experience for us. The third thing I want to note is that in part our comments on option 1 or option 2, as I have listened to them around the table, depend on our own intuitive feel for how close we are to needing to take action.  I can understand that, because it has influenced my own view; I think that as we look at the economy today, we should be talking about where we are in terms of our accommodation, and that we should in fact be thinking about removing accommodation.  It is highly accommodative, as we will talk about later today and tomorrow, and we need to think about doing that.  That means I would focus on the fed funds rate, as we always do.  And to your point, President Bullard, I think that is what people understand best.  They don’t understand QE3; they just know it’s out there.  But they do understand moving interest rates, especially the fed funds rate.  And that’s what we need to focus on.  One other point—I don’t know that we will know whether QE2 has been successful at least until the year 2015.  It’s a long, long gestation process. Around those issues, then, how do I answer the questions.  How do we proceed, subject to the idea that we need to be thinking about our fed funds policy.  I do say yes to the first question that we should in fact stop reinvestments as conditions allow us.  But my first step in the exit strategy is to change the forward guidance from exceptionally low interest rates for an extended period of time.  That is the key, that is the signal, and we should be thinking about that as we think about exit.  With that, our next move should be to move the fed funds rate up—1 percent by year-end or something—but that means the process has started. Then, the second question.  I think, after raising the fed funds rate to some point, I would pause and assess our economic prospects—where we are, what the effects have been, whether we shocked the market, what are the conditions.  When and if conditions warrant, I would then begin again to normalize policy at a deliberate pace, raising the fed funds rate and redeeming and selling securities concurrently to the extent that we can.  There is judgment here.  We would regularly review changes in the fed funds rate and asset sales in light of incoming information and adjust the exit program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability—long-term, stable variables, not short-term ones.  As long as conditions unfold as expected, I would also expect to continue normalizing policy at some regular pace.  Of course, if economic conditions do not unfold as expected, then we should prepare ourselves to normalize policy more or less rapidly based on those conditions, as we judge them at each meeting. For the third question, my preferred sequencing is that we raise the fed funds rate from its crisis level to closer to 1 percent as quickly as possible, ideally by year-end.  I believe we should then normalize both the fed funds rate and the balance sheet in terms of size, composition, and duration.  I think that part of the reason we are doing these repos and so forth rather than selling assets is that we want to keep the duration on our balance sheet and out of the rest.  I think we should try and get that transitioned as well, so we should be selling assets as we can, and on a faster timeline as well. On question 4, yes, I agree.  Of course, my definition of “intermediate term” may differ from your definition of “intermediate term.”  And that should be a discussion that we have here.  I think it’s important.  I would expect that we can renormalize policy and our balance sheet more timely than either option 1 or option 2 outlines.  But I am willing to debate that over time, as long as we get on the path to take this excess accommodation out of the system before we get a very bad surprise on the other end. With three interest rates—the federal funds rate, the interest rate on excess reserves, and the discount rate—I believe we will eventually move to either a floor system or a corridor system.  Before making this decision, though, I would prefer to see how events unfold as we move toward a more normal stance on monetary policy overall.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the author's thoughts and opinions.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a polite expression of gratitude and does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 146.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 147.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I wanted to follow up on this point that I learned from Vice Chairman Dudley last August, and now I’m apparently going to have to unlearn it.  [Laughter] My concern is that if we adopt a policy of redeeming MBS—suppose we do that in December 2011—and conditions soften in 2012 and longer-term rates fall, we will then be put in the position of stopping the policy at that point, because it could well be at that stage that we will begin to see people starting to pay down their mortgages more rapidly, just as we did in August 2010.  My vision, as I think I have heard from others around the table, is that the balance sheet track should be going on slowly downward in the background.  If we redeem MBS, we are going to be in the position of balance sheet management immediately.  That is what I took away from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, expresses concern about adopting a policy of redeeming MBS, while others around the table may have a different view on the matter.


Passage number 148.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Can I respond to that.  I think what you are describing is an environment where you don’t want to be tightening at all.  If you start tightening and then all of a sudden decide you don’t want to be tightening, then I don’t really have a problem reversing the agency MBS reinvestment policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement and willingness to reverse the agency MBS reinvestment policy if necessary.


Passage number 149.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is neutral and does not indicate any opposing ideas or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 150.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude directed towards Governor Duke. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 151.
  MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would also like to commend the staff for the work on the memos, and I will confess that I failed to identify this as an underdetermined optimization problem.  [Laughter] Over the last several years, I have supported asset purchases as our only option for easing.  But when it comes time to tighten, we can return to the short-term interest rate tool, and I believe we should.  I agree with Brian Sack; it is still the strongest tool in our kit.  I can’t quarrel with the political risk of maintaining a large balance sheet or the credit allocation argument.  But, still, I favor the use of the short-term interest rate tool whenever and as soon as it’s available and would address our concerns about the balance sheet only when our interest rate tool is fully functional again.  We have experience with it.  The public has experience with it.  It’s easier to calibrate and to communicate. In December 2008, when we made the decision to reduce the fed funds target to its current level, I worried about many of the consequences that we’ve discussed again here today—the narrow potential for spreads to adjust to preferred levels, pressure on the recovery of operating costs in money market funds and in banks.  I am also concerned about the potential distortions created by near-zero short-term interest rates.  So I favor the strategy that gets nominal short-term rates back into a normal range the soonest.  I say “short-term interest rates” because I think there is some risk in focusing on the fed funds rate as long as that market is limited to GSEs and a handful of counterparties.  I think the lesson we should take from the recent experience with the FDIC assessments is that short-term markets may react differently depending on whether they are dominated by U.S. banks that can earn interest on excess reserves and must pay FDIC assessments, foreign banks who can earn interest on excess reserves but do not pay FDIC assessments, or other players who do not have access to excess reserves as an investment alternative but also do not pay FDIC assessments.  Along these lines, I believe we may observe different results in the use of the reverse repo tool compared with term deposits, and I believe banks will bid differently on term deposits when they are offered in size and with an expectation of increasing rates. I’m a little bit concerned about the airline analogy, because now I am going to talk about throwing fuel overboard in order to reduce our landing weight.  [Laughter]  While I favor the exit sequence outlined in option 1, I fear that we might have to reduce our balance sheet more than we think to get reserves down to the point where temporary draining tools can tighten the link between IOER and other short-term rates. Turning to the specific questions asked, I agree that the first step should be redemption of agency securities, and I would favor redemption of Treasury securities only if that step was not anticipated to push back the first use of the interest rate tool.  I would put assets on a predetermined, preannounced path, subject to infrequent adjustments.  I would not be in favor of any asset sales that delayed liftoff of the funds rate.  However, once the funds rate was returned to a level that allowed us to use it for tightening or easing—say, fed funds at 2 percent—then I might favor asset sales that reduce the balance sheet more rapidly but delay further increases in the funds rate.  I agree with all the statements in question 4, as long as adjustments to asset sales are not viewed as an active policy adjustment tool.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their own opinions and preferences regarding monetary policy tools, but there is no direct disagreement or argument with any other person or viewpoint.


Passage number 152.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 153.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Bill Nelson suggested that there may be some variants on the two options he presented.  I have counted 14 so far.  [Laughter]  And I think I am going to use a strategy taken in the very best exam that I ever read from any of the roughly 2,000 students I have ever had, which was to refuse to answer the question that I had put on the exam.  I should also add some of the worst exams I ever got were ones that followed a similar strategy.  [Laughter] As I have listened to everybody today, I am a bit concerned about where we’re heading and what we think we are communicating by this discussion.  And mindful of the Chairman’s introduction where he suggested we are trying to find some principles, I am going to try to identify some principles rather than programs.  I think many of you have felt the tension between these and have suggested where there is some flexibility or where you are open to other things.  But for present purposes, I think it is particularly important to arm the Chairman with a smaller number of first principles that can be developed, as appropriate, over the coming meetings. First, I think that the strategy we pursue here should be about, and principally about, our monetary policy aims in the short run.  That may sound almost tautological, but I don’t think it is.  Some people are offended by having MBSs on the balance sheet, and some people are worried that we appear to be monetizing debt by having Treasuries on the balance sheet.  Well, we’ve got both of them on the balance sheet.  And those decisions were taken, and I wouldn’t want to see our exit strategy affected by some idealized desire to either have or not have some of these assets on the balance sheet as an ongoing matter.  Let’s instead focus on what is the best way to achieve, as we believe appropriate, the removal of accommodation when the time comes.  So that translates into, I think, a fair number of operational decisions that need to be made along the way, but ones that should be pretty straightforward. Second, as the Chairman suggested, I think anything that we communicate ought to be provisional.  And although I didn’t take the notes that he’s been taking, because I don’t have to synthesize everything, it seemed to me that at least half of you have suggested—whether state-contingent or provisional or conditional—some adjective that suggests we shouldn’t be locking ourselves in too much right now. Third, I also would like to see a pretty clear separation of the “when we exit” from the “how we exit” questions.  I think Tom is absolutely right—everybody’s views are affected, at least on the margin, by our policy predispositions.  But, again, in terms of public communication right now, I think it’s really quite important to keep those distinct, even though it is perfectly legitimate to address both of those questions. I would say that my fourth principle would be a certain degree of caution, particularly with respect to unintended consequences of things we don’t understand as well as we wish we did.  Narayana suggested that we don’t rely too much on models for thinking about what the impact of large-scale asset sales will be, and I think that’s a caution well taken.  I, like Bill, worry about yield curve effects if, for example, you had too many assets sold too quickly.  Listening to you and trying to pull some of what different people have said together, it seems to me there have been concerns about getting the balance sheet to a manageable state so that our effect on the federal funds rate will proceed as we would like it to.  At the same time, a lot of people have shown concern that there not be too much riling of the markets because we are not really entirely sure of how asset sales will be received.  A number of you have also said that some measure of predictability will both advance the aim of avoiding too much riling of the markets and allow people to plan a little bit more going forward. All of those suggest to me that a fairly cautious but straightforward and largely, though not totally, predetermined approach to asset sales, redemptions, or both is probably what’s warranted here.  I see a certain appeal to going in reverse, what Jim described as the LIFO approach.  But I think there are a couple of points of distinction that we should be aware of.  One is that the effects of these sales may differ from the effects of the purchases of the same assets precisely because the macro and financial environments in which the transactions are taking place are quite different.  Second, to a considerable extent, we didn’t have a whole lot of choice about the sequence that was followed on the way in.  You guys moved interest rates down to zero before I got here.  Then you had your “extended period” tool, and then it became necessary to think about large-scale asset purchases.  But on the way out, we do have a choice, and I think that assessing the pros and cons of various sequences and various combinations is probably the better optimization of policy here. There are multiple instruments available for the removal of accommodation, and I think a number of you have identified them.  I genuinely don’t have strong priors on those, so I would just reiterate that I think the principle should be a focus on the desired near-term monetary policy effects, thereby putting into a secondary position what I termed “idealized aims”; second, that this is provisional; third, that we separate “when” from “how”; and, fourth, that, particularly with respect to asset sales, we try to adopt a gradual and predictable approach.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 154.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Thank you" and "Governor Raskin" seem to indicate a polite expression of gratitude or acknowledgement to Governor Raskin.


Passage number 155.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate the richness of this debate regarding the parameters of exit, and while I believe it premature to begin the exit program, it’s certainly not premature to discuss the contours of what will be a process that, if poorly conceived and poorly communicated and poorly received, could lead to unintended macroeconomic consequences.  For that reason, I applaud the fact that we’re now having this discussion, and while not being present for the precursors to the analysis that began in April of last year, appreciate both that there’s been a lot of careful thought on this topic and that the duration and components of the accommodation are different now than they were in April of last year. I have several observations.  First, I want to underscore the Chairman’s view that public statements regarding exit not confuse the notion of “when” with the notion of “how.” Second, both options for sequencing, as presented in the staff memo, assume that a sizable amount of reserve draining will be conducted before the first anticipated increase in the federal funds rate target.  I’m still grappling with how such a sizable amount is going to be reduced in a mere six months in option 1 or in a mere three months in option 2.  I understand President Lockhart’s concern about starting the draining too early, but if reserves are as high as $1.6 trillion and the required reserve level at which movements in the federal funds rate affect loan balances is at something like $74 billion, how do we drain $1½ trillion in the short period of time without disruptions.  If these reductions prove to be too slow and there is strong evidence that a recovery is self-sustaining, perhaps we would then feel it necessary to engage in some accelerated asset sales ahead of a preannounced schedule in order to drain. Third, I want to make sure we understand the current effect of the GSEs in the federal funds markets.  Commercial banks are awash in reserves.  So my question is whether the largest sell-side participants right now are Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.  Now, footnotes 17 and 18 of the staff’s memo on the long-run policy implementation frameworks describe why limits to arbitrage have resulted in market rates typically being in the range of 10 to 15 basis points below the interest rate on excess reserves.  So if we suppose that the Chairman and the Secretary of the Treasury agreed that Fannie and Freddie could no longer be part of the federal funds market, would we then remove the ability for commercial banks to trade with the GSEs in such a way as to eliminate the gap between market rates and the interest rate on excess reserves.  So then if the federal funds rate were at the IOER, the FOMC, it seems to me, would have greater control when it begins to raise the IOER because the fed funds rate would move exactly with it. Fourth, regardless of whether Fannie and Freddie remain part of the federal funds market, I want to underscore the communication challenge that was raised by President Bullard and others that will need to be addressed, and that is that raising the interest rate on excess reserves will result in annual payments to banks, which will certainly require some explanation to the Congress and others in the public. Finally, when we discuss asset sales, we assume that such sales include sales of Treasuries in addition to sales of agency debt and agency MBS.  As we’ve heard, there are permutations to how these sales are executed that involve sales of one type before sales of another type, and from this perspective, I think it’s worth remembering that MBS have a more direct linkage to mortgage rates than do Treasury bills.  Also, it’s worth noting that President Kocherlakota’s observation regarding the pro-cyclicality in MBS sales needs to be factored in ahead of time as well, if we decide to start MBS sales ahead of Treasury sales. I will turn quickly to the questions.  One, Should the first step in exit be to stop the current policy of reinvesting.  I would say, yes.  I think that redemptions would generate a significant reduction in the balance sheet under an approach that is operationally simple, easily communicated, and not disruptive to markets.  For the second question, it is also my view that putting asset sales on a largely predetermined and preannounced path is preferable.  I haven’t yet bought into the full substitutability of the two tools primarily because of a lack of a robust experiment in that regard.  Third, at this moment I probably would favor starting to sell assets after the increase in the federal funds rate.  I don’t place a high priority on reducing the size of the SOMA portfolio quickly, especially if that would delay liftoff of the federal funds rate.  Of course, I would say that subject to the caveats I mentioned regarding the ability to drain or a dangerous supply shock that would trigger a big jump in inflationary expectations.  And I do agree with the three statements in question four.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's views and observations on the topic of exit strategy from the Federal Reserve's accommodation policy.


Passage number 156.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much, and thanks, everyone, for a very useful discussion. In terms of synthesizing [laughter] this discussion, we have a short-term and a long-term issue.  In the weeks ahead as the staff adroitly puts together the minutes, as they always do, I hope that they will go carefully through the transcript and try to identify the main themes that will help us think about how we’ll go forward. I have a more immediate problem, which is that tomorrow I’m going to be asked what the Committee has determined about exit strategy.  So I’m going to try to put some principles or bullet points down here—Debbie is going to write them down for me—and then let me go through them, and we can decide if some should be struck or qualified or whatever. First is that we had a useful discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses gratitude and acknowledges the helpfulness of the discussion. They also mention short-term and long-term issues and the need for further analysis of the discussion. The speaker then mentions their immediate problem of having to answer a question about the Committee's determination on an exit strategy, and they propose outlining some principles or bullet points for clarification. There is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 157.
 MR. TARULLO.  I disagree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their disagreement without engaging in any argument or confrontation.


Passage number 158.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And second, relating to what Governor Tarullo said, the most important thing, of course, is to meet our monetary policy objectives, and the pace and sequencing of our actions will be driven by those objectives.  In particular, the fact that we’re discussing exit does not necessarily carry implications for near-term monetary policy. Now, getting into more substance—first, I think most people were willing to say that they thought that the federal funds rate/IOER should be the principal tool for responding to macroeconomic developments.  I would add that, as a practical matter and taking into account President Lacker’s very astute comments, to make IOER effective, it will probably need to be supported by the draining tools that we’ve discussed in this room for some time.  So I would put the funds rate /IOER in the center of our strategy. Second, I would say that our forward guidance and our communication will provide as much warning as possible as we move toward the point where we begin to raise the short-term interest rate. The remainder of the points, some of which may perhaps be controversial, bear on how we’re going to deal with the balance sheet.  The first one is that I believe that a pretty strong majority agreed with the view that restarting redemptions—and I wouldn’t be specific about agencies versus Treasuries, et cetera—could be something that might happen relatively early in the process.  Next—and here I would turn to the three statements on the sheet—one objective we have is that in the intermediate term we want to return to a normal monetary policy framework.  I don’t think it’s time to start talking to the public about corridors and floors, but maybe a “normal framework” that I think most people would interpret as something close to a corridor system. The second of these principles is that our exit strategy involves going to an all-Treasury balance sheet. The third principle bears on the question of the pace and conditionality of asset sales, and there we got quite a bit of divergence, particularly when weighted by enthusiasm.  Now, a majority of the speakers did prefer a relatively steady pace of sales, although a couple of those folks were for very rapid sales and others were for more gradual sales, so it’s a little hard to rank those views.  On the other hand, I think most of the people who favored a relatively gradual sales process were open to the proposition that the pace of sales could be adjusted if macroeconomic conditions called for it.  So I would propose to summarize that detailed discussion with the last of the three bullet points, which says that there will be a framework that will be “communicated to the public in advance, and at a pace that potentially could be adjusted in response to changes in economic or financial conditions.”  I think the “potentially could be adjusted” leans a little bit toward nonconditionality, but I think it includes the possibility that we can respond and we will respond if economic conditions warrant. Finally—and this is a difficult one—When will the asset sales take place.  Now, again, in simple counts, a pretty clear majority, but again with different motivations and different perspectives, favored asset sales after the increase in the federal funds rate.  We had a few people who suggested a contemporaneous move, such as President Plosser and President Lockhart.  President Bullard, of course, made his very interesting intervention about the LIFO principle.  A few people, like President Lacker, wanted to move very quickly, so that, implicitly, sales would come very early.  I think, looking at the balance of the discussion, what I’d like to do is say something like “most, but not all,” or “many,” or something like that, “saw sales as taking place,” and I would say here, again, vaguely, “relatively late in the process,” which would encompass, perhaps, “contemporaneous with the increase in rates,” like President Hoenig suggested, or “afterward”—but again, acknowledging that some people had a different perspective. So these would be some interim things that I would try to report, again, as asked.  Some of these details may not come up, but I suspect some of them will.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a summary of a discussion and includes different perspectives and views, but no explicit disagreement or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 159.
 MR. FISHER.  Could you clarify, Mr. Chairman, that last point.  I have a feeling that will come up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I have a feeling that will come up" suggests that Mr. Fisher has doubts or a different perspective from the chairman.


Passage number 160.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The last point, yes.  I’ve got a little diagram here that shows the interest rate being increased, and then the question is:  Where do asset sales come on this timeline.  I note that a few people were in the contemporaneous camp—and, President Fisher, I have you there with an arrow pointed to the left, meaning that you’re happy to go along with the Bullard perspective.  That being said, a pretty significant majority still were on the right side of that line—that is, suggesting that asset sales should begin after the interest rate increases would begin, and that’s consistent, I think, with the view that the federal funds rate is the key policy tool.  I think this is an area where there was legitimate and interesting ongoing discussion that we shouldn’t cut off. Again, what I proposed was to hedge in two ways.  One, we would say that “most, but not all,” or “many,” or something like that, “preferred,” and then to use some term like “relatively late in the process” to encompass contemporaneous or later sales.  This may be even a little too weak, but that was my thought. I’d be happy to go through any of these again.  I don’t promise even that they’ll come out exactly as I just spoke them.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing different views on the timeline for asset sales after an interest rate increase, but there is no clear contention or disagreement expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 161.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I have just two observations.  I think you’re being asked to synthesize a lot of diverse views, and I understand that.  I think your first point was that the asset sales or the reduction in the balance sheet would depend on economic conditions.  I would encourage you to say that they can either be slowed down or speeded up, because I think the tone of how you say it will suggest that it’s only likely to go one way.  It would be helpful to say that it could go either faster or slower depending on economic conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Plosser disagrees with how the point about asset sales or reduction in the balance sheet is presented. He suggests that it would be more accurate to say that the process could either be slowed down or sped up, rather than implying that it will only go one way.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Well, “at a pace that potentially could be adjusted in response to changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement acknowledging the current situation and discussing the possibility of adjusting the pace in response to changes.


Passage number 163.
” MR. PLOSSER.  Up or down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions Mr. Plosser discussing a direction without any conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 164.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, up or down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given response is not sufficient to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 165.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Okay.  On the last part, I would recommend against the phrase “relatively late” because I think that connotes a longer period of time, and it may not be longer.  I would suggest that you consider something like, “Many of the participants agreed that asset sales would begin after”—just “after”—“initial rate increases.”  And “after” can mean it could be short or it could be long.  It just leaves it undefined.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is giving a suggestion for rephrasing, but not expressing disagreement or contention with the original statement.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Can I say “after” if I say “many” and I’m very clear that there’s still an open debate on this question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that there is an ongoing debate about whether or not "after" can be used if "many" is also used in a sentence. The use of "I'm very clear" indicates that the speaker has their own opinion on the matter but is not presenting a conflicting viewpoint or engaging in disagreement with others.


Passage number 167.
 MR. LACKER.  Would it help to say “after in the sequence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a clarifying question.


Passage number 168.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  In the sequence we had last year the redemptions weren’t much of an issue.  Now we have redemptions early or one of the first steps.  We have changes in the language, obviously, as one of the first steps.  We have in the center of this process the increase in interest rates supported by draining tools.  And then, most, but certainly not all—and we have an ongoing debate—preferred that the sales begin after the first increase in the IOER. President Bullard, I know you’re going to be giving your point of view, and I think it’s an interesting point of view, but I’ll try to make sure that I am clear that these things are not fine lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different steps and viewpoints in a process, without expressing disagreement or argument.


Passage number 169.
 MR. BULLARD.  I do think you’re summarizing the disparate views of the Committee fairly well, but I think this issue about redemptions being a lot different from asset sales is potentially confusing.  In a sense we are starting with the balance sheet if you went by the sequence, but we’re going to start in a certain way with the balance sheet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is expressing his thoughts on a potential confusion but is not arguing against anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement within it.


Passage number 171.
 MR. BULLARD.  And it’s just that the Committee seems to be reluctant to go as far as I would in wanting to adjust that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is expressing a difference in opinion, but there is no argument or conflict present.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, it’s true that they both shrink the balance sheet, but redemptions are predictable, passive, but I agree that there is sort of a LIFO principle there though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the truth in the fact that both redemptions and shrinking the balance sheet occur but agrees with the idea of a "last in, first out" (LIFO) principle being present.


Passage number 173.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since only a speaker identification is provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Further context is needed.


Passage number 174.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So I agree with that.  Any further comments.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with a certain statement.


Passage number 175.
 MR. TARULLO.  Can I just ask a question.  In the same spirit in which I spoke in the go-round, I guess I would just ask the question of how deeply you want to get into this tomorrow, given where the Committee is right now.  That is, one strategy is to try fairly, as I think you have in your summation, to characterize how the Committee breaks down on a number of substantive dimensions with some specificity.  Another would be to try to identify genuine consensus where it’s there, and I think you’ve got it on those three true–false questions, but in other areas, maybe intentionally to generalize so as not to get too deeply into some of these questions.  For example, as I was listening to these guys at the end of the table, I found myself thinking a little bit differently about the redemption versus asset sales point than I had before, and to me it’s not so fundamental to our approach.  Maybe it is to some people.  I guess I just wonder whether in a press conference you want to begin talking about those things, thereby potentially inviting further specific questions.  My question is not a rhetorical one.  It’s a genuine one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Tarullo is simply asking a question and expressing his thoughts about how the Committee should approach a certain topic.


Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think I have to balance, as you say.  I mean, I can’t go into too great a detail, but I hardly can deny that we had this conversation because the minutes will come out and many of these issues will be on the table.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker acknowledging the need to balance certain details and the possibility of those issues being discussed in the minutes of a conversation.


Passage number 177.
 MR. FISHER.  I want to second that point.  I think the more you begin to process, the more you’re likely to get questions that force you further to process.  I think providing these general outlines and a direction is what counts here.  You’re going to have subsequent press conferences, but it could be a trap.  So I agree with Governor Tarullo on this front, and I would just be as general as possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Fisher and Governor Tarullo are in agreement on the idea of providing general outlines and being as general as possible in order to avoid potential traps.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  On the other hand, the point of this is to be more transparent and to provide some help and guidance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states the purpose of something, which is to be more transparent and provide help and guidance.


Passage number 179.
 MR. FISHER.  Still, you’re going to get questions on specifics of sequence and all of these kinds of things if you’re not careful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a cautionary statement about the potential need to be careful in responding to questions about specifics of sequence.


Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I obviously won’t be able to answer detailed questions, because I don’t know the answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 181.
 MR. TARULLO.  I don’t think this is a matter of being more or less transparent in a sense because I think you’re trying to communicate where we are at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is expressing his opinion about the transparency of a certain matter, without indicating any disagreement or opposition to anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I will try to do that, but I did want to make sure I knew where we were.  [Laughter]  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. There is a humorous element with the inclusion of [Laughter], but it does not imply disagreement or contention.


Passage number 183.
 MR. LACKER.  I find myself very sympathetic to Governor Tarullo’s points.  On this last issue, which seems to be the one where it comes to a head, do you worry that just mentioning the views of a majority might lead a stampede of opinion to focus on that and treat it as if it’s a decision.  And the constructive alternative would be to mention that there are a range of views.  The majority seems to favor, but there are those who have other views and we haven’t decided.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between the speakers. Mr. Lacker expresses sympathy with Governor Tarullo's points and then raises a concern about the potential consequences of mentioning the views of the majority without acknowledging the existence of other views. There is no explicit disagreement or argument present in this passage.


Passage number 184.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I said I would say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage simply states that the speaker mentioned that they were going to say something, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 185.
 MR. LACKER.  Oh, okay.  Mention the other views as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the given passage, there is no mention of any other views or opinions, hence there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 186.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I will be clear.  Where appropriate, I will give a range of views.  I just don’t want to be clearly less forthcoming than the minutes will be on something like that, if asked.  I’m not going to go out and say, “Here’s the deal, guys,” and give them the story.  But if asked about that, I’ll try to convey the sense that there was a range of views. All right.  Well, I hope that all the press conferences will not generate this problem, but thank you for that conversation.  Any other comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the speaker's intention to be clear and transparent in their communication, as well as their willingness to provide a range of views if asked about a particular topic. There is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 187.
  [No response] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, wouldn’t this be a great time for a break.  [Laughter]  I’m informed the coffee is at—three o’clock.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only mentions the speaker's desire for a break and the audience's laughter in response.


Passage number 188.
 MS. DANKER.  We can just go look and see if it’s there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is suggesting a course of action to resolve a question, without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 189.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  My right-hand woman is going to go look.  Is it ready.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that someone is going to go look for something without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 190.
 MS. DANKER.  Keep going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Keep going." It is simply an encouragement or request to continue moving forward.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We should keep going.  Okay.  We can hear the staff presentation and then at three o’clock we will have a coffee break.  So let me turn this over now to David Wilcox.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the suggestion to keep going and discusses the plan for the staff presentation and coffee break.


Passage number 192.
 MR. NATALUCCI.4  I will be referring to the package labeled “Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants’ Economic Projections.”  Exhibit 1 depicts the broad contours of your current projections for 2011 through 2013 and over the longer run.  As shown, you continue to expect a gradual economic recovery over the next three years, with GDP growth—the top panel—picking up modestly for this year as a whole and accelerating further in 2012 and a bit more in 2013, while the unemployment rate—the second panel—slowly trends lower.  With regard to inflation—the bottom two panels—although you anticipate that total PCE inflation will move up this year, you project this increase to be temporary, with headline inflation moving back in line with core inflation in 2012 and 2013.  However, you generally see core inflation gradually edging higher over the next two years. Exhibit 2 reports the central tendencies and ranges of your projections for 2011 through 2013 and over the longer run; the corresponding information about your January projections is indicated in italics, and the current and January Tealbook projections are included as memo items.  On balance, your forecasts for this meeting point to somewhat lower GDP growth and slightly higher inflation over the forecast period than you projected at the time of the January meeting.  In your forecast narratives, almost all of you indicated that these changes were the result of weaker-than-expected incoming data and higher commodity prices.  A number of you also pointed to greater odds of a tighter stance of fiscal policy during the forecast period.  All of you marked down your projections for real GDP growth this year, with the central tendency of your estimates, shown in the top panel, noticeably lower than in January:  Most of you now anticipate that real GDP will increase about 3 to  4 The materials used by Mr. Natalucci are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 3¼ percent in 2011, versus nearly 3½ to 4 percent in the previous forecast.  By contrast, the revisions to your growth forecasts for 2012 and 2013 were modest:  You continue to see the recovery strengthening, with the pace of real GDP growth stepping up to about 3½ to 4¼ percent in 2012 and remaining near those rates in 2013.  This general pattern of revisions is similar to that reflected in the updates to the Tealbook forecast since January. Your unemployment rate projections are summarized in the second panel.  Reflecting the decline in the unemployment rate in recent months, nearly all of you lowered your forecast for the average unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of this year, with the central tendency of your projections for 2011 at roughly 8½ to 8¾ percent, versus about 8¾ to 9 percent in the previous SEP.  Your projections for 2012 and 2013 continue to trace a gradual downward path that is little changed from the projections submitted in January.  Consistent with your expectations of a relatively moderate economic recovery, most of you project that the unemployment rate will be about 6¾ to 7¼ percent even in late 2013—still well above the about 5¼ to 5½ percent central tendency of your estimates of the unemployment rate that would prevail over the longer run in the absence of further shocks (shown in the right-hand column).  This general pattern of revisions is broadly similar to the updates in the Tealbook forecast since January. Turning to inflation—the bottom two panels—all of you raised your forecast for total PCE inflation this year, with the central tendency of your estimates significantly higher and the dispersion of your projections noticeably wider than in January.  Most of you now anticipate that headline inflation will run about 2 to 2¾ percent this year, versus about 1¼ to 1¾ percent in your January projections.  However, most of you expect the increase in headline inflation to be temporary, with the central tendency of your estimates moving down to about 1¼ to 2 percent next year and running about 1½ to 2 percent in 2013, at or below the about 1¾ to 2 percent central tendency of your estimates of the “mandate consistent” inflation rate shown in the right-hand column.  The central tendencies of your projections for core PCE inflation for 2011 and 2012 have shifted up a bit and now run about 1¼ to 1½ percent this year and 1¼ to 1¾ percent next year before rising to nearly 1½ to 2 percent in 2013.  The Tealbook forecasts for both total and core inflation in 2012 and 2013 are in the lower part of the central tendency ranges of your projections. Your longer-run projections—detailed in the column to the right—anticipate that over time the annual rate of increase in real GDP will converge to about 2½ to 2¾ percent, with an unemployment rate of about 5¼ to 5½ percent and total PCE inflation between about 1¾ and 2 percent.  Of note, the central tendency for your projections of the unemployment rate in the longer run is now somewhat narrower than the 5 to 6 percent interval reported in January. Your final exhibit summarizes your assessments of the uncertainty and risks that you attach to your projections.  As indicated in the two panels on the left-hand side, a sizable majority of you continue to judge that the levels of uncertainty associated with your projections for both real GDP and inflation—as well as for the unemployment rate (not shown)—are greater than the average levels that have prevailed over the past 20 years. As shown in the upper-right panel, about half of you continue to view the risks to output growth as balanced, although a number of you now judge that those risks have become tilted to the downside.  The most frequently mentioned downside risks to GDP growth included further increases in commodity prices, a tighter-than-anticipated stance of fiscal policy, and an even-weaker-than-expected housing sector. Your assessments of the risks attending your inflation projection—shown in the bottom-right panel—have shifted noticeably to the upside, reflecting concerns about further increases in commodity prices, a potential rise in inflation expectations, and the possibility that the current highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will be maintained for too long.  These concerns, along with the upward revisions to your projections for inflation that I noted earlier, help explain why many of you believe that the Committee should begin to remove monetary policy accommodation earlier than is assumed in the Tealbook.  This concludes my prepared remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is summarizing the projections made by the participants and presenting them to the audience.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions for our colleagues.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply acknowledges gratitude and states that there are questions for colleagues.


Passage number 194.
 MR. FISHER.  I have two questions for Nathan.  We are still accommodative.  The Brits appear to have stopped, but, as you mentioned, the Europeans are tightening and others are tightening.  What do the Europeans see that we don’t see.  In your opinion, is it a difference in mandates, or do they see the world differently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a series of questions being asked by Mr. Fisher to Nathan.


Passage number 195.
 MR. SHEETS.  I think it’s a variety of factors.  The difference in mandate and perspective may be a bit of it.  But the real challenge for the ECB is the heterogeneity of performance and what the ECB Governing Council is trying to do is trying to balance this.   The German economy is just absolutely performing at an extraordinary pace.  Unemployment there in February actually fell to 6.3 percent, so they are getting to a point where unemployment is almost 3 percentage points lower than when the crisis started.  And Germany is 30 percent of the euro-area economy.  So you have the vast majority of that economy performing at a pretty solid pace and where slack is more limited.  And then you’ve got a fraction of the economy that is struggling in extraordinary ways.  But, you know, putting that into perspective, Portugal, Ireland, and Greece together amount to roughly 6 to 7 percent of GDP in the euro area.  So it is very small; it’s just a small fraction of Germany. We have looked at this by a variety of metrics, and it seems like where they are is reasonable based at least on one benchmark Taylor rule.  So I think that the differences really equate to differences in economic conditions between the United States and the euro area.  But then I think, as a secondary factor, there are some differences in perspective and mandate that also are having an effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an analysis of the factors influencing the ECB's challenges, such as the heterogeneity of performance and differences in economic conditions between the United States and the euro area. There is no indication of conflicting perspectives or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 196.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, when we talk about our U.S. situation, one of the restraining factors we envision on inflationary pressures, even though we revised our numbers upward, is our amount of slack, and particularly significant unemployment.  So I’m wondering, Nathan, if you would describe to us how much slack you see outside the United States.  And, how well and how able are we to measure global slack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and information about the global situation, specifically regarding the level of slack and the ability to measure it accurately.


Passage number 197.
 MR. SHEETS.  Okay.  Well, to answer your second question first, our ability to measure global slack is very, very limited.  We do our best; we have some benchmark estimates, but there are huge confidence bands around our estimates.  But our sense is that right now activity for the emerging market economies is pretty well close to what our best guess of potential is.  And for what it is worth, we have sort of massaged some of the IMF estimates.  That said, our estimate of slack and what the IMF is seeing are not that different.  For the major emerging market economies, output is approaching potential.  Then, as I described, the situation in Europe is that the vast majority of that economy is performing pretty well, but then you’ve got this extraordinarily soft spot where, frankly, I don’t even know how to begin to think about what the output gap is—in Spain, for instance, where you’ve got a 20 percent unemployment rate, or in Ireland.  I do believe that there’s a fair amount of slack in the United Kingdom, but, on the other hand, you’ve got offsets there with inertia in the inflation process that I don’t fully understand.  And then, Canada seems to be performing very strongly. So my sense is that, for the global economy as a whole, there is still a little bit of slack mainly in certain industrial countries, but the global economy is performing very well, and the amount of slack is diminishing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing their own limited ability to measure global slack and acknowledges that their estimate is similar to the IMF's estimate. They also mention different situations in various countries, but there is no direct contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 198.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only indicates gratitude, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The phrase "President Lockhart" alone does not provide any context or indicator of disagreement. More information is required to answer this question accurately.


Passage number 200.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Again, for Nathan.  At least if you’ve followed the press, there has been an intensifying discussion of Chinese inflation and their tightening.  Do you see any concern that they will actually have to tighten enough to materially slow down their growth rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for Nathan's opinion on whether there is concern that Chinese inflation and tightening will slow down their growth rate.


Passage number 201.
 MR. SHEETS.  Chinese inflation has been creeping upward.  The latest reading was 5½ percent, 12-month change, which is higher than what they are comfortable with.  The Chinese authorities are moving their monetary policy, both interest rates and reserve requirements, as well as a number of the quantitative tools that they have—maybe these days we would call them macroprudential instruments; previously, we would have called them interventions in the economy [laughter]—to try to rein in credit.  And it seems like that they are having some success.  So our baseline forecast for China is one where the Chinese economy slows to 8 or 8½ percent, and inflation comes down some, but, as you point out, I would say there are both upside and downside risks around that forecast.  It may be that the economy doesn’t slow as much as we think it will, and then the authorities will really have to put on the brakes.  That could generate an outcome there of sharper slowing than what we expect. That said, the Chinese authorities have been faced with these kinds of problems a number of times over the last decade, and each time have been successful in guiding the economy onto the smooth-landing course, and that is our expectation again.  If something different happened there, then our outlook for the global economy would be quite a bit different.  We really are getting to a point where China is becoming another engine of global economic growth, and without it we would have a softer global outlook than what I’ve discussed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily provides information about China's monetary policy and the potential risks and outcomes.


Passage number 202.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about President Kocherlakota that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 203.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question about the debt ceiling.  As noted in the Tealbook, it appears that investors are still pretty sanguine that some kind of deal will be reached, and that the debt ceiling will be raised by July.  In my own thinking, though, I see this as being a risk that we should take account of.  I was wondering what the staff perceives to be the economic and financial risks or consequences if the debt ceiling really isn’t raised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Kocherlakota expressing his own concern about the debt ceiling and asking for the staff's perspective on the potential risks of not raising it.


Passage number 204.
 MR. SACK.  As I mentioned in my briefing, I think the markets are very sanguine about the debt ceiling issue.  It’s hard to find any evidence that they are anticipating a significant problem.  I mentioned the Treasury bill curve, which doesn’t show any effects.  Implied volatility of long rates has come down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their observation about the markets' attitude towards the debt ceiling issue and providing evidence to support their viewpoint.


Passage number 205.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Markets have been wrong, though, before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement mentions that markets have been wrong before, indicating a recognition of past inaccuracies without expressing disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 206.
 MR. SACK.  Well, my point was going to be that many of us are surprised that there is not a bit more concern.  I think it’s uncertain how the Treasury would deal with the situation.  We know they have a set of tools that they would employ.  But if pushed to the brink, there is the question of what other steps they may take to be able to service the debt. If it went to the worst-case scenario where there was actually a default-type event on U.S. Treasury debt, I think it would be a significant market event.  And the effects would be in the directions you would expect—a bigger risk premium priced into the Treasury curve, a weaker dollar, and downward pressure on U.S. asset prices if foreign investors and others reevaluate the situation here.  So I think it could be consequential if we got there, but certainly our hope and expectation is that we won’t end up there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses surprise that there is not more concern about the possibility of a default-type event on U.S. Treasury debt. This suggests a disagreement between the speaker and those who are not showing much concern.


Passage number 207.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing none, I understand now the coffee is ready, so why don’t we take a 20-minute break and be back at 3:25 p.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests taking a 20-minute break, and since there is no response or objection from anyone else, it can be understood that everyone agrees with the suggestion.


Passage number 208.
  [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Hope that was refreshing.  We are ready for our go-round on the economy, and we’ll start with President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that they are ready to discuss the economy, starting with President Evans.


Passage number 209.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 210.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude towards President Rosengren.


Passage number 211.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The judgment on the data since our last meeting is a split decision.  Labor markets are improving, albeit slowly, but spending is slower than I expected.  Most of the good news has come from the labor markets.  Payroll employment in recent months is growing at a rate consistent with a gradual decline in the unemployment rate.  The unemployment rate has fallen a full percentage point over the past four months, to 8.8 percent, lower than I expected last fall. This improvement in the labor market is still not affecting labor costs, with wages and salaries growing quite slowly.  The quiescence in wages and salaries is consistent with substantial slack in the labor market.  This assessment of slack is consistent with the significant revision in the JOLTS data, which now show many fewer vacancies over the past five years.  The revision was primarily a result of reestimating the birth-death model, which had overestimated the number of new firms and job openings being created during the crisis.  The very low quit rate also suggests that considerable slack remains in the labor market.  A worker concerned about the outlook would be reticent to quit a job for fear of the inability to secure better employment elsewhere.  While the quit rate has risen off its lows, it remains substantially below its level after the last recession.  With existing workers reticent to move and the low participation rate indicating that opportunities are not attracting workers back into the labor market, we need much more improvement in labor markets than we have seen to date. While progress in labor markets has been slower than I hoped but more than I forecast, recent data on spending have been slower than I hoped and less than I forecast.  GDP growth over the past four quarters has averaged only 2.8 percent, just slightly above potential.  At the beginning of the year, I had expected growth in the first quarter to be well above potential, but now it looks as if growth will fall well short of that. Over the past four months, most forecasters have been revising down their first-quarter estimate with each new data release.  Like many of these forecasters, I have been surprised by weaker-than-expected consumption, housing, and state and local spending.  A key question is:  Given the surprise in incoming data and the likelihood of more fiscal tightening than I originally expected, how much of this weakness should be carried into future quarters.  While I’m assuming that this is a lull rather than a trend, the strength in spending for this year is in the forecast but has yet to be reflected in the data. Despite the significant food and energy shocks, my estimate of core inflation, like that of the Tealbook, remains well below 2 percent over the forecast period.  I focus on core inflation because over the period from 1985 to the present, whenever total inflation has diverged from core inflation, total has tended to return to core, perhaps consistent with well-anchored expectations.  While we need to continue to monitor inflation expectations and inflation trends, the evidence to date is consistent with inflation over the forecast horizon remaining under 2 percent. Like the Tealbook, my forecast has an unemployment rate at the end of 2013 well above full employment, and core and total PCE inflation well below 2 percent.  However, my forecast achieves this outcome with a federal funds rate that remains at the zero bound longer than assumed in the Tealbook.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and analysis based on the data and their own forecast.


Passage number 212.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply expresses thanks to President Fisher.


Passage number 213.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Plosser without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 214.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It consists of a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Pianalto.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 215.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The incoming data point to a more mixed picture than I was expecting when we last met.  We are again in the position of trying to judge whether a slowdown early in the year will extend further into the year.  Overall, I agree with the Tealbook that most of the slowdown is transitory.  In my remarks, I will focus on how I revised my projections since our last submission in January. First, I do see the incoming data as pointing to a surprisingly weak first quarter.  Given the range of weak indicators, I agree with the staff estimate of 1.7 percent GDP growth in the first quarter.  There is no shortage of potential explanations for a softer quarter, ranging from severe winter weather to the run-up in oil prices related to the developments in the Middle East and North Africa. While much of the softness looks temporary, there is reason to take some signal from the recent data and expect some additional softness in growth beyond the first quarter.  In projections from our econometric model in Cleveland, rising materials prices play a lead role in slowing the anticipated pace of GDP growth relative to a few months ago.  While I have previously reported small effects of commodity price changes on GDP growth, in our model, overall materials prices affect the economy more than commodity prices do.  While I don’t anticipate that materials prices will continue to soar, the increases that we’ve already seen were enough to modestly slow the projected pace of growth.  I should also note that my manufacturing contacts have mentioned that materials price increases are importantly affecting activity and profit levels, although not enough to derail growth in their businesses.  Putting all of this together, since January I have pulled down my forecasts for GDP growth for 2011 and 2012 by about ½ percentage point to around 3 percent in both years. The one bright spot among an array of disappointing data releases was the April report on labor market conditions, which confirmed the downward trend in the unemployment rate and confirmed a pickup in private employment gains.  Taking a closer look at the implications of unemployment for slack in the economy, my staff presented evidence that labor market slack is not going to go away very quickly.  One reason is that despite recent declines, unemployment remains stubbornly high.  A second reason is that, based on historical norms, firms have plenty of room to increase both hours per week and the number of workers.  Finally, the labor force participation rate is likely to rise as many individuals who would normally be participants in a stronger economy finally return to the workforce.  So while labor markets are improving, there is still a lot of slack in labor markets, and therefore, I don’t see wage pressures picking up any time soon. Labor market slack aside, the upward drift in core inflation in recent months and the rise in materials prices have led me to bump up my core inflation projections from my January submission.  I now expect core PCE inflation of about 1¼ percent in 2011 and 1½ percent in 2012. At our last meeting, there was some discussion about how quickly core inflation can rise in light of the significant increase in core inflation that surprised the FOMC in 2004.  My staff examined the chances of a similar rise in core inflation in the current environment.  To formally assess this risk for 2011, they relied on a small forecasting model that incorporates current conditions, which include variability of economic growth and inflation that is somewhat higher today than it was in 2004.  According to that model, even with today’s elevated volatility, the chance of a significant jump in core inflation, combined with modest GDP growth, is only about 20 percent.  Now, clearly, this is enough of a risk to merit paying attention to, but we should not react too hastily when higher probability outcomes show a more gradual increase in core inflation.  In my view, the chance of a surprise rise in core inflation is much lower today than in 2004, because our economy is much weaker today than it was then.  For example, the unemployment rate is more than 3 percentage points higher than it was in the first quarter of 2004. On inflation expectations, in the Cleveland Fed model, which accounts for a time-varying inflation risk premium, inflation expectations are at or below 2 percent out to 14 years.  That said, inflation expectations at horizons of three to five years ahead have risen and are now similar to the levels they were last spring.  After the spring of last year, inflation expectations started to drop with the growing signs of weakness in the economy.  This was a critical factor in my decision to support additional asset purchases.  So we should not be worried about inflation expectations at these levels, but I would not want to see them continue to rise. In my judgment, the risk to the outlook for GDP growth remains balanced.  While the recent weakness in most of the incoming data point to a risk of a sustained soft spot in the recovery, the surprising strength of employment suggests the potential for a stronger recovery. On inflation, I think the risks are more to the upside than the downside because of the rise in input costs and the threat that inflation expectations could move higher in response.  Still, the most likely outcome is a gradual rise in core inflation with moderate GDP growth.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions both positive and negative factors affecting the outlook for GDP growth and inflation. They mention a "mixed picture" and "surprisingly weak first quarter," but also mention the "surprising strength of employment" and a "gradual rise in core inflation with moderate GDP growth." This suggests that there is disagreement or uncertainty about the future direction of the economy.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 217.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have talked to a number of business contacts throughout the Ninth District over the past six weeks, and the high rate of headline inflation was very much on their minds.  One concern was that elevated oil and food prices would drive down demand for other goods and so choke off the recovery.  But the other real concern was that headline inflation would leak into what we at the Fed like to term “underlying inflation” and generate a persistent high-inflation scenario. In terms of the latter concern, many retailers pointed out that increases in input prices were putting upward pressures on their costs.  However, they remained uncertain about their ability to pass those cost increases on to consumers.  One offered story, though, is that they believe that the current high rate of headline inflation will give them, quote–unquote, “more cover” to initiate price increases in nonfood and non-energy goods and services.  According to this story, a firm can raise its prices more rapidly because households believe that all of their prices are rising more rapidly.  This story would mean that the apparently transitory increase in headline inflation has the potential to generate a self-fulfilling increase in expectations about core inflation—a self-fulfilling increase that could well prove to be persistent.  This story—that transitory movements in headline inflation can translate into persistent movements and inflationary expectations—is one that bears watching.  Fortunately, there is little evidence so far that this upward pressure on longer-term inflationary expectations is happening.  For example, the five-year, five-year forward breakevens remain in historical ranges.  The Cleveland Fed’s measure of expected inflation over the next 10 years, which President Pianalto was just referencing—I like that, because it attempts to strip away both liquidity and risk premium affects—has risen since last summer, but it does remain below 2 percent. So medium-term and longer-term inflation expectations do seem stable for now, but this risk that the transitory becomes permanent is one that we need to be prepared for.  And I’m not sure that we are.  If we look at our standard monetary policy rules, they are silent about how to respond to changes in longer-run inflationary expectations.  What triggers are we using to tell us that longer-run inflation expectations have risen.  Do breakevens need to rise to 3½ percent, 4 percent, 4½ percent.  Do the Cleveland Fed measures need to hit 2.2 percent, 2.5 percent.  How aggressive should we be if the economy were to hit these triggers.  As far as I can tell, we don’t have a systematic approach to dealing with this kind of scenario, and I think we do need one. In contrast, our policy rules are clear that the level of accommodation should track core inflation.  I took what President Evans was describing from the very interesting work that was being done in Chicago as proposing not tracking core inflation but some filtered vision of core, which is trying to tease out the persistent component of core.  That would be different from the kind of rules we have traditionally been using, and it would be interesting to see if those kinds of rules, using historical data, would actually perform better than the rules we’ve typically used.  But for now, I think I would rather stick to the rules the Committee has typically used, the ones that track core.  And as a result, and as my memo on reducing accommodation indicated, I am going to be tracking PCE core inflation carefully in thinking about the appropriate timing for reducing policy accommodation. The Tealbook now forecasts that core PCE inflation will be 1.4 percent over 2011.  My own outlook has not changed that much.  It continues to be that PCE core inflation will be 1.4 percent or possibly even higher.  And our own rules indicate that the FOMC should respond to that increase in core inflation by raising the fed funds rate.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Kocherlakota expressing his views and concerns about inflation and monetary policy.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply consists of a polite expression of gratitude from the speaker, addressed to President Williams.


Passage number 219.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply contains a thank you statement from the speaker, President Hoenig. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 221.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, our region of the country is doing well-to-booming.  If you look at the downside, our housing market is comparable to other areas where there was a buildup of supply that exceeded the buildup in household formation; that we’re working through.  Once you get by that, our manufacturing sector came down slightly in our most recent survey, but that was from a record high and we are seeing that continue to expand.  Our retail sales did slow down in the first part of the quarter, but did pick up pretty significantly in March, which, from our point of view, is very positive.  Agriculture is continuing to do very well—a boom—and energy is also in a boom environment. To add an anecdote on my concern for leverage, I think it is worth sharing this.  We have a pretty sizable energy company, recently formed in the past five years.  It shifted its strategy toward oil, away from natural gas.  And they were able, because of the low cost to leverage, to buy 1 million acres of development rights on land in our region for about $200 million—$200 an acre of development rights.  They then formed a royalty trust and took approximately 65,000 of those acres from which they had borrowed the $200 million, went on an international tour and raised money from sovereign wealth funds for rights to this royalty unit, and then closed their deal here in the past few weeks for rights on 65,000 of the 1 million acres for $238 million.  So leverage is doing well in our part of the country:  low cost of borrowing, easy money, lots of liquidity sloshing around, here we go.  So I bring that up as a caution to this Committee. On the national level, I agree—information we have received since the last meeting indicates that the economy recovery continues and that our labor markets are improving modestly but steadily.  Household spending and business investment in equipment and software both continue to expand, while at the same time improving their balance sheets, which is good, from my point of view.  Since the last meeting, we have also seen that inflation expectations have remained, as we say, contained, except that what we are seeing for energy, food, and now a broader basket of goods  indicates confidence may be waning in that particular sector.  One thing on unemployment—if you break it out, we are seeing pretty significant improvements in employment for college graduates.  We are seeing less in terms of high school and non–high school; I’m not sure monetary policy can solve that, and I think we should be mindful of that. One other thing that I worry about is that while we talk about our very accommodative policy as necessary, we also see these energy and commodity costs rising and moving forward.  And, yes, they may transitory, but I’m afraid that when you have wages that are not rising, real income is falling, and high prices in that environment actually kill demand because incomes can’t keep up.  And the effect on that middle income group that we are so concerned about supporting is going to be negative, not positive.  So we may not see the inflationary pressures three and four years from now, but that may be because we have a new economic crisis built around the fact that we put all of this liquidity into the system, built these commodities up, and when the prices adjust and come down, it will be because we have starved the middle class in terms of real-wage increases. I think we need to be careful about how long we leave this very accommodative monetary policy in place, because we are creating imbalances.  They are going to correct.  And that, of course, will fall most heavily on those with middle and lower incomes.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the potential negative effects of inflationary pressures and the long-term consequences of the accommodative monetary policy. They argue that the policy may lead to a new economic crisis and negatively impact the middle and lower income groups.


Passage number 222.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude from President Lacker.


Passage number 223.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Reports from our contacts indicate that the Fifth District economy continues to grow.  Our April survey released this morning indicates that manufacturing is expanding, though not quite as broadly as before.  Our respondents remain quite optimistic about future conditions, though, and many have plans to hire in the first half of the year.  Several firms told us of difficulty finding adequate workers, because they preferred to collect unemployment benefits or can’t pass drug tests.  Service-sector activity is expanding more broadly now, and our retail index swung strongly into positive territory this month with big gains posted for sales revenue and shopper travel.  Expectations for demand over the coming six months improved noticeably as well. Commercial real estate markets continued to show signs of improvement in some areas of our District.  While vacancy rates are mixed across the District, strong markets such as Washington have been able to attract financing and investment.  Several contacts have noted the availability of construction financing for federal buildings, educational institutions, and medical facilities.  They called this the “feds, eds, and meds sectors.”  And the data center market is said to be exploding. Commentary on inflation pressures was once again widespread, as many of you have remarked as well.  Price growth picked up in both our manufacturing and services surveys this time, and is at or approaching the all-time highs for those series that they reached in 2008.  Manufacturers report passing on cost increases to industrial users but indicate difficulty passing them on to retailers. It’s worth noting that the current wage index has picked up in both manufacturing and nonretail service sectors, and the manufacturing wage index number is the second highest on record.  At the national level, in response to softer data, the Tealbook has lowered its near-term forecast for GDP, and I think that makes sense.  It seems reasonable to pull down projections for consumer spending in light of the energy price increases and other gloomy news, although I haven’t pulled down my forecast quite as much as the Tealbook’s.  In addition, the Tealbook has written down a lower trajectory for residential investment this time, which I also wholeheartedly endorse.  The first-quarter numbers for housing managed to underperform my already minimal expectations, and I continue to expect housing activity to remain at exceptionally low levels for an extended period.  In fact, my housing forecast looks more like the Tealbook’s fed funds forecast—[laughter]—for that matter, my fed funds forecast looks more like their housing forecast. On the other hand, the outlook for exports and business investment in equipment and software looks pretty good at this point.  I’d part company with the staff with respect to second-half core inflation; they have it, I think, settling down, and I have trouble dismissing the many anecdotes we’ve heard from firms that are having their margins squeezed and are expecting to raise prices later this year.  We’ve gotten those reports for several months now, and they come from various-sized firms and various industries and various locations around the District, and they are reminiscent of what we were hearing in 2004 when core and overall prices did accelerate appreciably.  My best guess is that we’ll see a relatively permanent step-up in core inflation to near 2 percent.  I don’t view this as inconsistent with our reads on the expectations of the public regarding inflation beyond the near term, and those appear to be reasonably well anchored at this point.  And I think that is going to temper the extent to which a significant part of firms’ cost increases are incorporated into final prices, and that should keep core from rising much above 2. But I don’t think we can take those favorable expectations for granted.  I think we need to be sure to validate those expectations.  They rest on some presumptions about our actions and statements, our reaction function.  So we are going to have to make sure our actions and statements in the coming year do validate those expectations.  In my view, this is going to require that we return policy to a neutral stance more promptly than the Tealbook assumes. Two final comments.  One, President Kocherlakota very aptly noted that the policy rules to which we make frequent reference leave out changes in inflation expectations, because when we apply them in the models we leave out any doubt in model agents’ minds about the likelihood that we are going to stick to that policy rule.  There is empirical work done by a former colleague of mine, Marvin Goodfriend, an essay from about a decade and a half ago called “Monetary Policy Comes of Age” in which, for the period after Volcker and Greenspan, he documented instances in which longer-term bond rates rose by a substantial amount in a very short amount of time, more than could be attributed to a change in expected real rates, and from which the Committee inferred were changes in inflation expectations.  And the Fed reacted strongly to counteract that and to tighten policy by more than we otherwise would have.  I think that’s the place to look for guidance as to what magnitude of response one ought to presume in a reaction function like that. Finally, in response to President Evans’s remarks, I would like to disavow any unhealthy preoccupation with endogeneity or exogeneity [laughter] and ask you to consider an experiment:  Start a DSGE model projection with initial conditions in which slack variables are less than they really are—say, in your last period, say the fourth quarter—because of a configuration of shocks that lead them to be less than they otherwise would be, and in which marginal costs are commensurately lower.  My conjecture is that you would get a higher inflation forecast, and I think that experiment could motivate commentary to the effect that slack will keep inflation low.  As you can see, there is nothing essential about endogeneity or exogeneity there.  I don’t think that thought experiment is inconsistent with anything you said, so the attribution to exogenous shocks versus slack—I just don’t see the distinction there. Now, I haven’t seen your group’s research, and it’s been a little while since I reread Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, at least a few weeks—[laughter].  But more to the point, my guess is that agents in that model and in your paper—back to my other comment—have 100 percent confidence in a reaction function.  I don’t believe real-world agents are quite that confident.  For evidence, you could look at the five-year, five-year forward last year when in the summer we had this fall in inflation expectations, and it seemed inconsistent with us being believed with 100 percent probability to be following a constant rule. I will say, though, to President Evans’s credit, he has given me a brilliant idea.  I think I am going to ask my staff to do research extending my JPE article.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and sharing their own opinions and observations.


Passage number 224.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’ll take five years to get published, though.  [Laughter]  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 225.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing gratitude towards the chairman, indicating agreement and cooperation.


Passage number 226.
 MR. EVANS.  Mr. Chairman, can I say something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple question being asked by Mr. Evans.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you want a rebuttal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 228.
 MR. EVANS.  No—the reason I mentioned slack is that there’s not an output gap in that model.  I mean, slack is when you put it into the Woodford-type of style, and you talk about the different type of market equilibrium.  We can construct a slack variable; that’s a concept that we did for the inflation dynamics.  But per se, marginal cost is really the relevant thing.  So you have to work pretty hard to come up with a concept that looks like a Woodford slack variable.  But the object that you would work on to get at what you are talking about—which is a valid experiment, I’m not denying that—would be to pump different shocks in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a concept and acknowledging that the suggested experiment is valid.


Passage number 229.
 MR. LACKER.  What you say is exactly true.  The inflation dynamics run off marginal cost.  There is this link that one can draw in many models, a one-to-one relationship between the level of marginal cost and the level of the variable that seems to accord with the notions of slack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that what the other person is saying is true and agrees with their point about the relationship between marginal cost and the variable.


Passage number 230.
 MR. EVANS.  I was trying to skip that additional assumption, which often is at the heart of what people are objecting to, which is, it’s not observable.  But we can talk about this more.  I understand that we’re going to have some discussions about DSGE models at upcoming meetings as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that the speaker was trying to avoid a certain assumption and mentioning that there will be discussions about DSGE models in the future.


Passage number 231.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay, great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person saying "Okay, great" is acknowledging and responding positively to the previous statement.


Passage number 232.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply mentions the position or title of President Bullard without providing any information or statements that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 233.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard, you raise valid points about the relationship between core and future headline, but I think the idea that we target core inflation is kind of old.  I think everybody around the table does target forecasted headline inflation, and I just want to mention that tomorrow in my press conference I will be highlighting the projections, and I’ll be focusing entirely on headline inflation, but on the forecast of headline inflation in the medium term.  Your comment about taking core out of the projections is an interesting one, though.  I’ll have to keep that in mind.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges the valid points raised by President Bullard and agrees that targeting core inflation is old-fashioned. They also mention that they will focus on headline inflation in their upcoming press conference and consider the idea of excluding core from the projections.


Passage number 234.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Yellen without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 235.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My view of the modal outlook is little changed since our March meeting.  I agree with the contours of the Tealbook and in particular with the judgment that the first-quarter soft patch probably reflects idiosyncratic factors with relatively little bearing on the outlook.  I anticipate economic growth at a moderate pace during the second half of the year and expect it to strengthen over time. An armada of headwinds is constraining the recovery:  higher food and energy prices, falling housing prices, ongoing weakness in residential and nonresidential construction, intense pressures on state and local government spending, and, beginning next year, significant fiscal drag from the federal budget.  Nonetheless, I anticipate that the impetus from investment and consumer spending, along with robust global growth, will prove powerful enough to overcome these drags.  Business confidence has improved markedly.  Manufacturing activity is robust.  Our accommodative monetary policy has caused credit and broader financial conditions to ease, supporting aggregate demand through many different channels.  There are heartening signs of improvement in the labor market, and recent data suggest that unemployment and vacancies are now tracing the cyclical pattern that has been typical of past recoveries.  I see this as encouraging evidence that unemployment is mainly cyclical, not structural, and should, therefore, revert to normal as the recovery proceeds.  My bottom line is that the U.S. economy appears to be in a self-sustaining recovery that is proceeding at a moderate pace.  I expect the output gap and unemployment to decline, but slowly, so both will be substantially higher than normal levels at the end of the forecast horizon. Turning to inflation, measures of underlying inflation remain well below the 2 percent level I consider consistent with our dual mandate.  For example, the market-based core PCE price index has risen less than 1 percent over the past year, and at an annual rate of 1.2 percent over the three months ending in February.  These inflation outcomes partly reflect healthy productivity growth and modest wage increases.  Unit labor costs have barely increased since 2007.  Moreover, inflation expectations remain generally well anchored.  Higher commodity prices have naturally caused headline inflation to surge in recent months.  Core inflation has also picked up somewhat as producers are passing through a portion of their higher input costs into the prices of a broad range of goods and services.  However, as long as commodity prices generally level off, I expect that by around midyear, headline inflation will revert to rates close to those of core inflation, which in turn should decline significantly over the second half of this year.  With exceptional slack in the labor market throughout the forecast horizon, I see little chance of the second-round effects that would occur were employers to boost wages in an effort to compensate workers for the real income losses they have sustained.  And here I agree very much with President Williams’s comment that there is virtually no evidence in the United States of real-wage rigidity.  Therefore, I expect inflation to remain subdued throughout the end of the forecast horizon. My modal forecast is benign, but the risks surrounding it keep me awake at night.  As policymakers, our job is to be prepared to respond to a wide array of potential threats, and some could necessitate more-rapid policy tightening, whereas others would call for additional policy accommodation.  We therefore need to maintain open minds on the future stance of monetary policy. The most obvious risks relate to commodity prices.  Higher food and energy prices are sapping household purchasing power, and the effect is evident in consumer surveys and anecdotal reports of retrenchment by the lower-income households most severely affected.  Anecdotal evidence also suggests that the uncertainty associated with recent commodity price trends is causing some businesses to put expansion plans on hold.  These existing downside risks are compounded by the possibility that futures prices notwithstanding, commodity prices could escalate a lot further, potentially derailing the incipient recovery.  Were such a scenario to materialize, we might well conclude that policy should be more accommodative than in the Tealbook baseline.  Of course, we must also be prepared for the possibility that a further surge in commodity prices could push up inflation and inflationary expectations, triggering a wage–price spiral to take hold.  Such a development would necessitate a significant policy response.  Our experience during 2002 to 2008, when oil prices more than quadrupled, but measures of underlying inflation remained close to 2 percent, gives me comfort that commodity price movements need not trigger such an outcome, but we cannot take such a benign scenario for granted. I actually have quite a long list of risks that I worry about, but I’ll mention just one other.  A second risk that worries me relates to fiscal policy.  Meaningful efforts to cut the federal budget deficit could produce a significant and extended drag on economic growth in the years ahead.  The recognition in the Congress that a multiyear budget plan to stabilize the U.S. debt-to-GDP ratio is essential to fiscal sustainability and longer run economic growth is heartening.  Failure to enact such a package would threaten our financial stability, while an extended period of delay would be associated with elevated uncertainty that could start weighing heavily on the spending decisions of households and businesses.  However, the needed fiscal adjustment is substantial, and a program on the necessary scale could be associated with significant fiscal drag that would reduce the equilibrium real interest rate in coming years.  In this scenario, a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy could be appropriate for quite some time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 236.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 237.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Bankers and bank analysts are increasingly less worried about credit quality and much more worried about the ability of banks to generate asset and revenue growth.  Credit metrics are within or rapidly approaching long-term acceptable standards in commercial lending, auto lending, and now in credit cards.  Classified assets are declining at larger banks and leveling off at smaller banks, and a number of bankers point out that a significant portion, up to one-third, of CRE assets classified as nonperforming have continued to pay as agreed.  Absorption of commercial space continues but at low rental rates.  Still, cash flows support debt services as long as interest rates remain low. Even in residential mortgage portfolios, new entrants into delinquency are slowing.  Bankers suspect that this improvement could be seasonal as tax refunds could be helping borrowers catch up, but they point out that, at least, if borrowers are using the cash from tax refunds to make mortgage payments rather than something else, that would represent progress.  It’s also possible that this is finally a manifestation in mortgages of the credit cycle that we already saw play out in auto and credit cards, as fewer borrowers are losing their jobs and newer loans are of much higher quality.  I also believe that the sharply lower delinquency rates across products and across borrowers are indicative of less financial stress among those who still have access to credit or credit outstanding, possibly a signal that we’re coming to the end of deleveraging, especially among consumers.  However, I would point out that this signal would not apply to the long-term unemployed, those who have found jobs at much lower wages than they had previously, or those with severely delinquent or underwater mortgages. Demand for all types of credit remains weak.  There’s some growth in C&I lending primarily reported by larger banks lending to larger companies, but it is still event driven, such as for loans to fund mergers and acquisitions.  Those who reported lending for working capital or capital investment cited loans to strong sectors such as manufacturing, energy, and agriculture-related businesses.  There also appears to be some slight pickup in small business lending and evidence that small businesses perceive loans as slightly easier to get.  Banks reported easing of terms and rates in commercial lending in the SLOOS.  Easing is usually prompted by competition, and, indeed, in my conversations, a few bankers characterized competition for C&I loans as aggressive.  A number of banks reported some demand and some appetite for new CRE loans, primarily for purchases of existing properties, refinances, and multifamily.  Banks also reported easing standards in consumer credit in the SLOOS.  However, the bankers pointed out that during the recession, credit performance for a given credit score band had deteriorated, so the cutoff scores were raised.  What they now report as easing is really a return to the previous levels. One of the key assumptions in the Tealbook forecast is that the economic recovery will be supported by increasing credit availability.  Overall, my impression is that credit conditions are considerably easier than they were at the height of the crisis, but that, with the exception of residential real estate lending, they’re probably pretty close to as good as they’re going to get. Even as loan demand remains weak, deposits continue to show strong growth.  Bankers are having a tough time finding ways to employ these additional deposits.  Most have already replaced much of their wholesale funding with deposits.  Some are actively using lower interest rates to discourage new deposits and refusing to bid on large deposits, and rates are reportedly being quoted in the single digits for large deposits, consistent with the rates we’re seeing in other short-term markets. Finally, lest we get too complacent about reserve levels, as a final indicator of bank balance sheet preferences, we could look at banks’ willingness to hold reserves.  About two-thirds of the reserves created since we started the LSAPs in November have been absorbed by foreign banks, and a few large U.S. banks have substantially reduced their individual holdings of reserves even as the aggregates have increased.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. It mainly presents observations and analysis of the current state of credit quality and lending conditions in the banking industry.


Passage number 238.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 240.
 MR. FISHER.  I want to just address one issue the Governor raised— and I admire the way you spent Easter weekend.  I think if you look at the transcripts thoroughly, what you’ll see is that what we were hearing from business reporters, to which I am a devotee, was a significant buildup in price pressures leading up to August 2008, and they were right.  They did not anticipate the collapse in demand that occurred as a result of the financial crisis, and that’s when you began to see a reversal in expectations.  I think we have to be very careful to dismiss microeconomic decisionmakers.  They should supplement and complement the data.  Data are history.  What we’re trying to get a sense of is things at the margin.  I always preface my comments by saying “for what it is worth,” and for what it is worth, I think it is valuable to listen to those who actually allocate resources, decide who to hire, and price products.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MR. FISHER is expressing his opinion and suggesting that it is valuable to listen to business reporters and microeconomic decision makers.


Passage number 241.
 MR. TARULLO.  I anticipated that [laughter], which is why I went back to 2005, because we didn’t have a financial crisis following 2005, and there were many of the same kinds of expectations.  And I guess, Richard, what I’d say is that the 2008 transcripts are probably more a lesson in the need to look at what else is going on.  I have to say, I was taken by the relative downplaying of financial risks and the relative playing up of inflationary risks in the middle part of 2008.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own observations and insights about the 2008 transcripts.


Passage number 242.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given statement, "President Kocherlakota," does not contain any information or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states the title or position held by someone named Kocherlakota. Without further context, it is not possible to determine any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 243.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think these observations about the labor market are spot on.  I will say, I’ve spent some time looking at these data too, and I think it’s very confusing.  One thing I would point to—and I think I mentioned this last time—is looking at these broader measures of unemployment and thinking about the marginally attached, et cetera, I would have thought that if we were seeing a group of people leaving the labor force who were about to pop back in, you would have seen more of an increase in the group of marginally attached workers than we’ve seen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is agreeing with the observations made about the labor market and expressing their own confusion about the data. They also point out something they had mentioned previously, which aligns with the overall sentiment of the passage.


Passage number 244.
 MR. TARULLO.  I would think that there should be something to that as well, Narayana.  And it is frustrating to use the published BLS data because they simply aren’t as granular as would be useful to us.  But that’s why one of Alan’s hypotheses is particularly interesting, which is that people are going into training or, in some cases, going into child care for their own kids for some specified period of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 245.
 MS. YELLEN.  I just wanted to ask the staff—isn’t it the case that the broader measures of unemployment have declined less than the official measure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question being asked by Ms. Yellen to the staff.


Passage number 246.
 MR. WASCHER.  Right.  From that standpoint, people who want a job but have dropped out of the labor force and still indicate that they want a job might have accounted for 0.2 percentage point of the decline in the unemployment rate over the past year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 247.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Certainly I accept that amount would be about right, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the proposed amount or statement.


Passage number 248.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 249.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The moderate pace of the recovery is continuing.  The economy continues to face a number of headwinds limiting its ability to grow faster.  These headwinds include higher gasoline prices, reduced government spending at both the state and national levels, and a housing market characterized by low equity values, supply overhang, and deteriorating quality. Historically, my projections have been more pessimistic than the staff’s because of my continued concern regarding the housing market, low state and local spending, and the slow resumption of consumer demand.  Wanting to offset this pessimism with the seemingly good news that the unemployment rate was looking lower—and not daring to wade into the debate over modern finance models between President Evans and President Lacker, nor having really the extensive list of interlocutors known to President Fisher, and, finally, seeing no short-term end to the fact that I will always be last in the economic go-round [laughter]—I had no choice but to hit the road last week in search of some observable data and traveled to an unemployment center. The one I visited is known for its cutting-edge approach in providing training, job prospects, credit counseling, foreclosure counseling, and other enhancements to people moving in between jobs.  I claim no academic precision to the sampling here, nor do I claim anything about the temporal dimension to these observations.  I went to the unemployment center with no preconceived notion except data from the latest household survey showing that the number of people involuntarily working part time had increased by 90,000 in March to 8.4 million.  The household survey also indicated that the nation’s 13½ million unemployed people have been out of work, on average, for at least 39 weeks.  With all of this labor available, one question I had is whether the recent increased inflation could lead to a wage–price spiral of the kind that typically ignites the runaway levels experienced in 1979 when inflation was 13.32 percent.  Another question I had is whether improvement in the unemployment rate alone should cause us to claim “mission accomplished.” What I observed at the unemployment center—actually, it was more positively called an employment center—is a pipeline that carries the newly unemployed between jobs.  The existence of jobs at the end of the pipeline is what motivates people to even enter the pipeline and participate in services provided throughout the process, such as resume writing, computer literacy, one-on-one counseling, and foreclosure prevention.  The quality of the jobs at the end of the pipeline was not particularly exciting.  The day before I was there, the city’s stadium had been rented by Monster.com to accommodate job seekers and employers.  The job seekers showed up in droves, but the bulk of vacant jobs represented by the few employers that participated looked mostly like multilevel marketing jobs that paid commission only and were based on the number of friends you signed up. Not all job seekers were uneducated.  Most recent additions of job seekers to this particular employment center were college and graduate-school educated.  On the day of my visit, they were pharmaceutical company employees, and they were clogging the pipeline, in the view of the less educated, because the more educated were settling for jobs that were lower paying and of a kind that the less educated were vying for.  Once the less educated saw that they were losing out, they left the pipeline, thereby abandoning the retraining programs that could have been of some benefit and increasing the time these people remain jobless and with insufficient income. Another group of employees clogging exit from the pipeline were the so-called surviving employees.  These employees have jobs but are so demoralized and exhausted by being the sole survivors holding onto their jobs and picking up the slack of the laid-off employees that they, too, are looking for jobs.  Once they add to the competition for a vacant job, they bump away the unemployed in the pipeline who believe themselves to be increasingly stigmatized by the length of time they’ve been without work.  So the existence and attractiveness of jobs at the end of the pipeline determined whether people even entered the pipeline to begin with. For the recently unemployed, the challenge of this employment center was to tighten the link between the employer doing the layoff and the about-to-be-laid-off employee so as to get the employee into the employment center before being laid off.  This way the employee would stay engaged in a job search.  Of course, despite enhancements like resume writing, one-on-one counseling, and computer literacy training, the only real enhancement seems to be a high probability of their being a job. I’ll stop there but sum it up by saying that this picture, were it to be duplicated somewhat consistently across the country, is not a picture of robust job creation, nor one that seems susceptible to setting off a dangerous wage–price spiral, nor one that shows bargaining and negotiation over wages to be anything but concessionary.  It’s a long way of saying that labor markets will be strong when the economy can absorb the people who want to reenter the job market.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Raskin, is expressing concern about the slow pace of economic recovery and the limitations on growth due to various factors. She also questions whether the recent decrease in unemployment rate should be seen as a sign of success. This indicates a disagreement or difference of opinion about the state of the economy.


Passage number 250.
 [Meeting recessed]   April 27 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  I’m going to start the meeting today by completing the go-round from yesterday.  I’ll give you my quick summary of the discussion on the economy. As a diversion while we’re doing that, we’re going to have some photos taken.  We’ve learned that photos not taken during the meeting have much jollification going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply providing an update and plan for the meeting.


Passage number 251.
 MR. LACKER.  So we should act naturally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "we should act naturally."


Passage number 252.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes.  The advanced report on durables was received this morning.  We obviously haven’t had a chance to look at it carefully, but we were looking for a strong report.  At first blush, it looks like we got one, and our preliminary take is that it should leave our projection about unchanged for the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement and satisfaction with the report they received. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage.


Passage number 253.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any questions.  [No response]  All right.  Then we’re ready to go to our monetary policy go-round, and I’ll call on Bill English to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange informing the audience that they are ready to proceed with the monetary policy discussion.


Passage number 254.
 MR. ENGLISH.5  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the package labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives” that was distributed earlier.  The package includes the three draft statements, including the changes that we distributed on Monday, along with associated draft directives. Turning first to alternative B on page 3, notwithstanding the softer-than-expected tone of the indicators for the first quarter, Committee members may see the outlook for real activity and inflation going forward as about in line with their expectations at the time of the March meeting, and so believe that no change in the near-term course for monetary policy is called for.  Policymakers may anticipate that higher energy and other commodity prices will boost headline inflation only temporarily because they see commodity prices leveling out and longer-term inflation expectations remaining stable.  Moreover, because higher commodity prices reduce real incomes and damp consumer spending, policymakers may feel that the monetary policy implications of the resulting higher inflation are countered by weaker output and employment, suggesting that no adjustment to the trajectory for policy is necessary. More broadly, policymakers may see unemployment as too high and likely to remain so for some time, as suggested by your SEP submissions.  And, as discussed yesterday, a number of potential measures of underlying inflation have moved up from their lows, but remain around 1 percent.  Indeed, most of you project PCE inflation in 2012 to be below your estimate of its mandate-consistent level in the longer run, and only three of you see it coming in higher.  You may also judge that longer-term inflation expectations are not that different, on balance, than at the time of the March meeting.  The Michigan survey median 5-to-10-year inflation expectations measure reversed its March rise and is in the middle of its range over the past several years.  The Board staff’s forward measure of inflation compensation from nominal and indexed Treasury yields has fallen back in recent days and is now up less than 10 basis points, on net, since March and remains within the range seen since the crisis.  Against this backdrop, you may believe it is appropriate to complete the current asset purchase program at the end of June and wait for additional information on output, inflation, and inflation expectations before deciding on your next step. As for the statement language, the first paragraph would be updated to suggest somewhat less confidence in the strength of the recovery and would acknowledge that overall inflation has picked up in recent months.  Depending on your assessment of the market- and survey-based measures of inflation expectations, you might want to soften a bit the statement that “longer-term measures of inflation expectations have remained stable” by adding the word “generally” that is shown in brackets.  With Monday’s changes, paragraph 2 has been updated to clarify that higher commodity prices have increased headline inflation, but the Committee continues to anticipate that inflation will fall back to mandate-consistent levels over time.  Finally, in paragraph 3, the statement would indicate that the Committee “will complete” the $600 billion of intended purchases announced in November.  It would go on to note  5 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). that “the Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings in light of incoming information and is prepared to adjust those holdings as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability.” A statement along the lines of alternative B would be about in line with market expectations and would probably have little effect on asset prices.  However, if the reference to longer-term inflation expectations being only “generally” stable were included, market participants would likely expect a somewhat more rapid shift to removing policy accommodation, particularly since the conditioning assumptions in the “extended period” language in paragraph 4 include “stable inflation expectations.”  The result would likely be some upward pressure on interest rates and perhaps the foreign exchange value of the dollar, and a modest decline in stock prices. Alternative C, page 4, might be appropriate if the Committee were more concerned that the recent rise in inflation may not prove transitory, believed that the economy was on a solid growth trajectory, and perhaps also saw output as closer to potential than the staff projects.  The intended size of the asset purchase program would be cut to $450 billion and the statement language adjusted to signal that redemptions and an increase in the federal funds rate target could come sooner than markets currently anticipate.  You may be worried that the higher prices for oil and other commodities could, in a context of accommodative monetary policy and large federal deficits, lead to an increase in longer-term inflation expectations that would be very costly to reverse later on.  If so, you might judge that bringing the purchase program to a rapid close and signaling that you intend to move toward exit relatively expeditiously could lead to improved medium-term macroeconomic outcomes.  Some of you may also find a reduction in policy accommodation attractive because of concerns about signs of potential asset price misalignments or increased leverage in some parts of the financial system that could contribute to financial instability. The statement under alternative C would provide a somewhat more upbeat assessment of current conditions and the outlook than that under alternative B, noting that the recovery “is on a firm footing” and that conditions in the labor market “are improving.”  The inflation discussion in paragraph 1 is the same as in alternative B, but paragraph 2 puts greater emphasis on the importance of the stability of longer-term inflation expectations in ensuring that the recent rise in overall inflation is temporary.  Paragraph 3 scales back the size of the asset purchase program, and the statement would also indicate that reinvestments of principal would continue only “for now” and that the Committee anticipates “exceptionally low levels” of the federal funds rate for “some time,” rather than for an “extended period.” Alternative C would surprise market participants and would likely lead to an increase in longer-term interest rates, lower stock prices, and a rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar. Alternative A, page 2, might be seen as appropriate if policymakers see the weaker pace of the recovery of late as likely to persist, or if they see greater downside risks to the outlook for economic growth, arising, for example, from the possible effects of higher energy and other commodity prices on household spending.  In this environment, members may think that a move toward easier policy is more likely than one toward tighter policy over coming months, and that emphasizing that the door is open to additional policy accommodation could reassure households and businesses and so support the recovery, even if no policy change were ultimately required. The statement for alternative A would note that the recovery is proceeding at a moderate pace, but more slowly than had been anticipated at the time of the March meeting.  It would also note that higher energy costs may be weighing on household spending.  Paragraphs 1 and 2 would suggest somewhat less concern about inflation expectations and the inflation outlook than in alternative B.  Paragraph 2 would also note increasing downside risks to the outlook for economic growth.  Paragraph 3 would confirm that the Committee “will complete” its purchases of $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities and that it is “prepared to expand and extend the purchase program” if needed to achieve its objectives.  The fourth paragraph would provide more-explicit forward guidance about the expected path for the federal funds rate by specifying that exceptionally low levels were likely “at least through mid-2012.” Market participants would be surprised by the adoption of alternative A.  Interest rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely fall, and stock prices would probably increase. Draft directives for the three alternatives are presented on pages 6 through 8 of your handout.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That completes my prepared remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 255.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there questions for Bill.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a polite statement followed by a request for questions.


Passage number 256.
 MR. EVANS.  Maybe I shouldn’t have been surprised.  Maybe I should have studied this a little more carefully, but in alternative B, there’s new language relative to what was put in the Tealbook; in paragraph 2:  “Other commodities have pushed up inflation in recent months.”  I noticed in your analysis you referred to it as headline inflation.  It seems like a noticeable change in our assessment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply pointing out a change in language and expressing surprise or curiosity about it.


Passage number 257.
 MR. LACKER.  Which part.  Paragraph 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 258.
 MR. EVANS.  Paragraph 2.  We say, “measures of underlying inflation continue to be somewhat low” and then we say that increases in energy prices have pushed up inflation in recent months.  Then we’re going to say “and a decline in inflation to rates consistent with” our mandate.  So we’re now talking about inflation being too high relative to our mandate, whereas we’ve had an extended discussion about inflation being low relative to our mandate.  It seems it needs some modifier like “headline inflation” or “near-term inflation” or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker points out the contradiction in the statements made regarding inflation. They mention that measures of underlying inflation are low, but then acknowledge that there has been an increase in inflation due to energy prices. The speaker suggests that there should be a modifier to clarify which type of inflation is being referred to, to avoid the contradiction.


Passage number 259.
 MR. LACKER.  Wouldn’t “inflation” without a modifier be presumed to refer to headline, and a modifier be presumed to be required to refer to something else, like core or underlying or forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and suggesting a possible assumption about the usage of the term "inflation" and its need for a modifier to specify the type of inflation being referred to.


Passage number 260.
 MR. EVANS.  Inflation is a general rise in all prices, and we’re pointing to a relative price increase as moving inflation.  So I think it’s a very subtle point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is explaining the difference between inflation as a general rise in all prices and a relative price increase. He mentions that the distinction is subtle but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 261.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we’re anticipating the discussion.  The origin of this change was actually President Lacker’s memo, which was circulated.  And yes, again, “inflation” is intended here as headline inflation, as distinguished from underlying, and President Lacker’s memo made the point that, instead of talking about the general term in the context of price stability, we could talk about the desire to have overall inflation come back down to what we think is the appropriate level.  But this is obviously open to discussion in the go-round.  So why don’t we just do it in that context.   Any other questions for Bill.  [No response]  All right.  If not, President Williams, you’re first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply discussing the origin of a change in discussion and mentioning that it is open to further discussion.


Passage number 262.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as "MR" does not provide enough context to determine if there is any disagreement present.


Passage number 263.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  Although we’re experiencing a bulge in headline inflation—I guess I used “headline”—underlying inflation remains low, and our forecast is that overall inflation will fall well below desired levels next year, and I expect significant resource utilization gaps to continue for quite some time.  Therefore, the current very accommodative stance in monetary policy remains entirely appropriate. In terms of the wording in the statement, I actually like the changes that were made over the weekend and in the Monday draft.  I think it is important to recognize that inflation is above desired levels currently and explain that we expect that to come down.  I would also maintain the description of longer-term inflation expectations as “stable” rather than “generally stable.”  I think this is an important point, as Bill mentioned.  Both survey and market-based measures are within the ranges that have prevailed over the past decade, and I think we should be careful not to change the language on something important like this based on what has proven at times to be volatile data.  We see that in the Michigan survey; it popped up, and then it has come back down.  We’ve also seen that in the breakeven inflation.  So I definitely would keep the word “stable.”  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Williams expresses support for alternative B and agrees with the wording in the statement, including maintaining the description of longer-term inflation expectations as "stable."


Passage number 264.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Lacker.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 265.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I believe there are reasonably strong arguments for choosing alternative C from a certain point of view and not providing further stimulus at this time.  The recovery seems well established, and price stability often requires preemption, especially at this time of the business cycle.  Despite those arguments, though, I can support alternative B.  We’ve encountered enough speed bumps in this recovery to make cutting back on stimulus perhaps less urgent right now.  In addition, in our discussion of exit strategies, I didn’t hear any convincing reasons to doubt that we could withdraw stimulus at a fairly rapid clip if need be, and I take it as a corollary of doing whatever it takes to provide sufficient stimulus that we stand ready to withdraw stimulus at whatever pace is required to keep inflation well contained as the expansion unfolds. Regarding language, I did, indeed, make three suggestions regarding paragraph 2(b), two of which were adopted in this draft.  The motivation was to provide, similar to President Kocherlakota’s suggestion last time, more connection to real life in our description of inflation.  It just seemed to me “currently putting upward pressure on inflation” was more consistent with an overall inflation rate that hadn’t risen yet and was threatening to, and yet we’d had so many months of inflation well above what we want that it was worth acknowledging to the public that we understand that inflation is, indeed, too high right now, and why. And about relative price changes, President Evans, I understand that when oil prices go up much more rapidly than other prices, it’s a relative price change, but if it brings the average up, then it’s inflation as well, and you can’t deny that.  I mean, if there aren’t offsetting declines in other prices that keep the average constant, one is equally entitled to call it an increase in overall inflation as well. I also was concerned about this language about underlying inflation.  I think it’s widely interpreted as a code word for core inflation, and I had two concerns about sentence 2.  One of the main ones is that rather than relying on the notion of overall inflation converging to what we think of as underlying inflation over time, why not communicate that we think the rise in inflation is transitory; why not come out and say, “We expect inflation to decline soon”.  It struck me as more clear to say it that way.  The other thing is that sentence 2 is one of the five places we refer to the mandate in this statement, and we say underlying inflation is low relative to what the Committee judges—I’m not sure we’ve ever spelled out underlying inflation and made clear that it’s our forecast and not core.  My concern with sentence 2 is that it’s open to misinterpretation that our interpretation of the mandate has to do with core rather than overall inflation.  Evidently there were countervailing concerns about sentence 2.  I’m anxious to hear what they were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Lacker presents arguments for choosing alternative C and not providing further stimulus, but ultimately supports alternative B. He also expresses disagreement with the language used to describe inflation and underlying inflation.


Passage number 266.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 267.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  Given the weakness in spending over this quarter, there remains significant uncertainty about the strength of the recovery.  Furthermore, by the end of 2013, I expect unemployment to be too high and inflation to be too low, even assuming completion of the Treasury securities purchase program and keeping the federal funds rate at the zero lower bound longer than in the Tealbook. I continue to see many downside risks to the outlook.  Problems in Europe, fiscal austerity measures, tightening in emerging markets, and weakness in the first quarter in consumption, local government spending, and housing could spill over into future quarters.  Any one of these factors could exert enough drag on future growth to put my forecast at serious risk. Given the low inflation rate, we have plenty of room to encourage faster growth in the economy.  I hope the economy is strong enough that we can begin removing accommodation by allowing redemptions in the late fall, but that depends on receiving stronger data than we have seen so far this year. In terms of language, I share President Evans’s concern—I actually like the previous language in that sentence better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and supporting alternative B for the given reasons.


Passage number 268.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states the statement "Okay. President Kocherlakota."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 269.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I’m not totally happy with paragraph 2 as written.  I think it’s an attempt to be what the younger folks might call a mash-up between President Lacker’s version and the original.  At the risk of confusing things still more, let me make a suggestion, which would be to drop the last part that’s highlighted in red—the “and a decline in inflation to rates consistent with the Federal Reserve’s mandate”—and replace it with “in a context of price stability.” I think what’s confusing about the paragraph right now is, we talk about underlying inflation being low, then inflation goes up to being high, and then we’re talking about what we want it to come down to be.  I find the paragraph confusing when I read it.  I think my suggestion may be more helpful, but maybe others will have ideas about how to address this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota expresses his disagreement with paragraph 2 as written and suggests a modification to clarify the message.


Passage number 270.
 MR. TARULLO.  Narayana, you’d keep Jeff’s first change and revert to the original language for the second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The mention of changing the language does not imply any opposition or conflict between the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 271.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That is correct, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Kocherlakota affirms that something is correct without any conflicting information or opposing views being presented.


Passage number 272.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is simply addressing the chairman.


Passage number 273.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Lacker without providing any information about his actions or statements that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 274.
 MR. LACKER.  On the seesaw pattern of referring to low inflation and high inflation—my suggestion would have eliminated references to inflation in sentence 2, which would eliminate the up-down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is making a suggestion to eliminate references to inflation in a specific sentence.


Passage number 275.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I remember that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a personal recollection, there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 276.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I don’t want to interject, but it may help a little bit to know that in my remarks to the media later today, I’m going to be focusing very much on the projections, including the near-term projections vis-à-vis the longer-term objectives of the Committee, so I think there will be more opportunity to explain this particular configuration than would otherwise be the case.  That’s a central goal of my presentation.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their intentions for a future presentation.


Passage number 277.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or response from Mr. Kocherlakota.


Passage number 278.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states the title or position of President Kocherlakota without providing any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 279.
   MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  As I think about the evolution of future policy, I continue to focus my attention on core inflation.  Core inflation was under 1 percent over the course of 2010. Our estimates in Minneapolis are that the output gap was around minus 4 percent at the end of 2010, and given these conditions, as you highlighted, Mr. Chairman, it’s appropriate for monetary policy to be highly accommodative, and it is.  The Board of Governors’ staff estimates suggest that the LSAPs are generating enough stimulus so as to be roughly equivalent to a fed funds rate of minus 2½ percentage points.  I guess there’s some range between minus 2 and minus 2½, but I’ll stick to the rough equivalence. Now, some observers have suggested that this level of stimulus should remain in place as long as inflation expectations remain stable, but such an approach is inconsistent with the kind of rules we have in the Tealbook, and they’re inconsistent for a good reason.  If we waited until inflation expectations move, we’d actually probably have to impose much bigger employment costs on the economy to try to get them back to where we want them to be.  So it’s, I think, a better policy to adjust our level of accommodation as the economy moves towards the Fed’s targets.  The staff now forecasts that core PCE inflation will be 1.4 percent in 2011.  My own forecast is slightly higher, and these kinds of increases in core PCE inflation would argue for a reduction in accommodation. At the same time, unemployment will be at least 1 percentage point lower at the end of 2011 than in November 2010.  This change, too, argues for a reduction in accommodation—and I think Governor Tarullo made some good points yesterday—assuming, of course, that the natural rate of unemployment did not fall by as much over the same time frame. Mr. Chairman, I found your comments on my memo to be very helpful yesterday.  In particular, I have to say that I had really underappreciated the notion that accommodation is being removed as we move closer to a date when our holdings of longer-term securities return to a more normal level.  I think this idea is a very important one and a very intuitive one. If I’m sitting there as a member of the public thinking the Fed is going to hold onto their long-term securities for 30 years, and six months pass, well, not much accommodation is being removed by that.  But if I’m thinking it’s going to be more like three years that the Fed is holding onto those securities, when six months pass, then there’s a fair amount of accommodation being removed.  This really points to the need to have some strong communication about what our expectations are for the date of eventual balance sheet normalization when our holdings in long-term securities return to something consistent with what we think of as being normal. There’s a variety of ways we could do that communication.  We could do it during the press conferences.  I heard, and I don’t want to overstate this, a fair amount of agreement among members of the Committee that we were planning to get back to something like a normal balance sheet over a five- to six-year time frame.  But another way to do it would be to add a projection.  We offer our projections of longer-run inflation; we could offer a projection of a date that we expect balance sheet normalization to take place.  Right now, though, the communication is proceeding in a rather informal way.  I think our main communication is President Williams’s working paper, and that’s probably not the best way for us to communicate these things, with all due respect.  [Laughter]  But I do continue to anticipate that in the fall the Committee will need to respond to the changes in economic conditions by taking the first steps toward raising the fed funds rate.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 280.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  There have been several good suggestions about how we might change the projections, and I’m sure the Subcommittee will be eager to dig into those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 281.
 MS. YELLEN.  Will do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement conveyed in the given passage. It is a straightforward response indicating agreement or compliance with a request or instruction.


Passage number 282.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yet another possible suggestion, of course, is to project the funds rate itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is merely suggesting another possible suggestion.


Passage number 283.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Oh, that is a good suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is responding positively to a suggestion.


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 285.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I prefer alternative C.  Economic growth, as I’ve said many times, will most likely continue to be moderate, as consumers and businesses and financial institutions balance their increasing spending motives with the need to deleverage, which is in process and has to take place.  This process will take time, and maintaining a zero policy rate, I think, invites future imbalances that will undermine longer-term growth, which is our mandate.  Inflation is increasing.  Energy and food inflation have been especially notable, obviously.  The broader inflation measures are moving higher as well.  I am concerned that maintaining our highly accommodative policy stance amid a recovering economy, even though modest, and rising underlying inflation puts us behind the curve and risks a repeat of the policy mistakes of the ’70s and the 2000s.  We are just inviting trouble by staying too low too long. To rebalance the risks to the outlook, we need to rebalance our monetary policy, and I would start modestly, by taking the “extended period” language out.  And I’d also at least consider seriously stopping our investments at the $450 billion number.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 286.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 287.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Our second round of LSAPs is nearing its scheduled conclusion in June.  I was not in favor of this policy when it was implemented in November, but I see little to be gained at this point of ending it early.  We are almost done. As we discussed last time, I thought it important that our April statement signal that LSAPs will end in June, and alternative B, paragraph 3, does that.  In general, I do prefer the language in alternative C, but like President Lacker, I can live with something closer to B.  However, I would like the statement to go somewhat further in preparing the public for exit and giving the Committee more flexibility, so that it can act sooner rather than later, if necessary.  I think this is a good time to begin changing the language.  Because the Chairman is having a press briefing after this meeting and the next meeting, it gives us opportunities to make more-extensive language changes in the statement than we might feel comfortable doing otherwise.  The Chairman will be able to explain what we mean by our changes rather than letting the public divine what we meant. First, I think we should take the opportunity when the LSAPs end in June to also stop reinvestments of MBS.  We should signal this in the statement by saying the Committee will complete $600 billion of longer-term Treasury purchases by the end of the quarter, and at that time intends to end the policy of reinvesting principal payments from securities.  The market has reacted quite benignly to the Treasury sales of MBS.  I don’t anticipate such an adverse reaction to our announcement that investments will end, and it will help prepare the public for our eventual exit.  I think paragraph 4 is becoming more problematic, given the inflation and inflation expectation numbers.  Are inflation trends really subdued.  Are inflation expectations really stable.  I think we should consider adjusting the language, if not today, then in June.  Is “extended period” consistent with potentially raising the funds rate, as President Kocherlakota suggested, by year-end. Even the Tealbook puts a nonnegligible chance of raising rates this year, although the point forecast suggests a longer period before liftoff.  We don’t want to mislead the public, but paragraph 4, I’m afraid, might do that.  Instead, I think we could say, “The Committee will maintain the target rate of the federal funds rate from 0 to ¼ percent today, and based on its outlook for the economy and inflation, anticipates that it will remain low for some time to come.”  This works, because paragraph 2 discusses our outlook for inflation—the fact that we expect the effects of higher energy and commodity prices to have transitory effects on general inflation.  And paragraph 1 explains that labor market conditions are improving.  Because we are releasing new forecasts at the press briefing, changing the language to refer to projections seems sensible. I would also note that among the various policy rules in the Tealbook, the so-called growth rate or first-difference rules suggest that the funds rate should be about 50 basis points this quarter and 90 basis points by the third quarter.  Of course, different rules give different guidance, and I have argued before why I like something more like the first-difference rule, in part because of measurement problems, but I won’t repeat those arguments today. A couple of wording choices we talked about last time could be implemented today and explained during the press conference.  I would like us to consider changing paragraph 2 so that it refers to—and I raised this point last time—“employment” or “unemployment” rather than the “unemployment rate.”  Our mandate is in terms of maximum employment, not the unemployment rate.  Labor force participation rates are a variable we have even less control over than we do employment.  By emphasizing the unemployment rate, we risk giving the idea that we won’t begin exiting until the unemployment rate is back down to the natural rate.  But this is misleading.  I believe we will need to act before the unemployment rate gets back down to a normal level. I think alternative C’s characterization of where the economy is relative to our dual mandate—namely, that employment and inflation have moved somewhat closer to the levels that the Committee judges is mandate consistent—rings truer than paragraph 2 in alternative B, which seems to brush aside the recent increases in inflation and inflation forecasts.  That is why I generally prefer alternative C. We also should consider clarifying what we mean by underlying inflation.  As President Lacker was suggesting, we had this conversation last time as well.  I think we have some concept of inflation over the medium run, not just core inflation in mind.  So why don’t we say that, rather than referring to underlying inflation. I’m also worried that claiming expectations remain stable may not be entirely credible.  Indeed, some have argued that, in fact, expectations of inflation have risen, reflecting the abating concerns about deflation.  Five-year, five-year TIPS have risen considerably since last fall, and so to say that inflation expectations are stable may be a little bit awkward.  In fact, if we recall, we wanted to get them up somewhat since last fall. So I would suggest that the last sentence of paragraph 1 reads something like as follows:  “Inflation has picked up in recent months, but longer-term inflation expectations remain within historical norms, and indicators of inflation over the medium term are subdued.”  I think that language would fit well with the Chairman’s emphasis on our forecast in his press conference, and he could get away from using underlying inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. This is evident in the statements such as "I do prefer the language in alternative C, but like President Lacker, I can live with something closer to B" and "That is why I generally prefer alternative C." These statements indicate that there is disagreement or differing preferences among the individuals speaking.


Passage number 288.
 MR. TARULLO.  Can you read that again, Charlie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Tarullo asking to have something read again by someone named Charlie.


Passage number 289.
 MR. PLOSSER.  “Inflation has picked up in recent months, but longer-term inflation expectations remain within historical norms, and indicators of inflation over the medium run are subdued.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, simply states that inflation has increased recently, but long-term inflation expectations are still normal and indicators of inflation in the medium run are not alarming.


Passage number 290.
” MR. TARULLO.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement where Mr. Tarullo thanks someone. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 291.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I think communication and transparency are very important policy tools at this point.  This will be especially true as we choreograph our exit of this period of accommodation.  The changes in language that I am suggesting are some of those I believe that we might need to implement in the next couple of meetings to prepare the public for the start of an eventual exit.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their belief in the importance of communication and transparency as policy tools, specifically in the context of planning an exit strategy from a period of accommodation.


Passage number 292.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And that indicators of what remain subdued, at the end.  Sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in the given passage. The sentence provided does not convey any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It seems to be an incomplete sentence and lacks sufficient context to determine if there is any contention.


Passage number 293.
 MR. PLOSSER.  “Indicators of inflation over the medium run remain subdued.”  As opposed to “underlying inflation,” and that would play into the forecast language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply quotes Mr. Plosser stating that indicators of inflation over the medium run remain subdued, and suggests that this plays into the forecast language.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 294.
 MR. LACKER.  Which medium run, past or the future—going which way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the phrase "Which medium run, past or the future—going which way" implies that there are multiple possible perspectives or interpretations regarding the medium run, and it suggests a disagreement or debate about which direction to focus on.


Passage number 295.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’m thinking future.  Or you could say, “forecast of inflation over the medium run.”  That’s why this language “underlying inflation” is confusing, because it’s interpreted as core.  What you are really talking about is your predictions of where inflation is going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification on the term "underlying inflation."


Passage number 296.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s fair.  We have a lot of work to do, I think.  Your particular suggestion is very interesting, but it would also require work in the second paragraph, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there is mention of work to be done and a suggestion that would require additional work, there is no indication of contention or disagreement between the speakers in this passage.


Passage number 297.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes, because “underlying” shows up there as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply consists of someone expressing gratitude to President Bullard.


Passage number 299.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, President Bullard.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both individuals are being thanked and there is no contradicting or conflicting statement between them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 300.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  In general terms, my outlook is not that dramatically different than it was in March.  My forecast is for moderate output growth, unemployment rates that remain elevated, and core inflation rates that are still below our mandate-consistent levels. Like the Tealbook, I revised up my projection for core PCE inflation.  This revision moved up my expected date for the first increase in the fed funds rate by one or two meetings.  However, my outlook is still consistent with the “extended period” language in alternative B. While my outlook does not support the quicker policy response offered by alternative C, I am concerned about the upside risk to inflation.  Temporarily high headline inflation presents a price stability risk if we’re not able to keep longer term inflation expectations anchored.  Fortunately, as I mentioned yesterday, a range of financial market indicators suggests that longer-term inflation expectations remain mandate consistent, and, in my view, I think we need to maintain those expectations right where they are. I would not use “generally” in front of “inflation expectations” in the last sentence in paragraph 1.  I would leave it as it is.  I also think that providing greater clarity on our exit strategy would help us with our policy credibility and help us to maintain inflation expectations at their current levels.  Being more specific with the public about our policy intentions and the methods that we’re going to use would help to offset some of the public concern about our ability to control inflation with such a large balance sheet. I think another step in helping us with policy credibility and maintaining inflation expectations anchored would be to publicly announce an explicit numerical inflation objective.  As we have been discussing, I think this is going to be a difficult time to describe our outlook for inflation to the public.  Setting an explicit numerical objective would help with that communication.  It would also force us to be clear on which measure we are targeting.  So I hope that we can return to that issue at a future meeting. I also share the concern that has been raised by several of my colleagues about the new language in paragraph 2.  That is, stating in paragraph 2 that underlying inflation is low, but then stating later on that we are going to see a decline.  But, Mr. Chairman, given your comments that you will address this at the press conference this afternoon, I am comfortable with the language as it is in this new alternative.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, supports alternative B but expresses concerns about the language in paragraph 2 and suggests making changes to provide greater clarity on the Fed's policy intentions and inflation objectives.


Passage number 301.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage "Thank you. President Evans" as it is a brief statement showing gratitude towards President Evans.


Passage number 302.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I support the announced $600 billion of additional asset purchases.  I support maintaining the “extended period” language.  I broadly agree with the Tealbook’s policy assumption, basically, which is a fairly extended accommodation.  In making this recommendation, I continue to focus on our dual-mandate goals for the economy.  Whether you look at real GDP, nominal GDP, or employment, we continue to be far below levels that I associate with a well-functioning economy related to pre-recession levels.  I think that we are still pretty far below that. Because President Plosser keeps mentioning the unemployment rate in the context of the statement, I always remember what Chairman Greenspan and Don Kohn used to say:  When you talk about unemployment, the measures are pretty variable; they move around month to month in ways that require a lot of understanding.  The labor force also moves around a lot.  But something about taking the ratio of those cleans this out, and the unemployment rate is a fairly stable measure.  It doesn’t move around very much.  I think you are asking for more explaining if you move away from that the unemployment rate; I’m not bothered by the unemployment rate at all. In terms of inflation, I would just like to make a side comment for the record, because President Fisher yesterday mentioned again this language like, “Our policies have been monetizing the debt.”  And I just want to be very clear on the record that I disagree completely with that characterization.  I think that monetizing the debt is when you permanently replace debt with money.  Our discussion yesterday was all about the fact how that is not going to be a permanent replacement, and so I just think that is a mischaracterization of our policies. Now, for inflation.  I guess I didn’t study the new language carefully enough over the weekend, but I do have some sympathies to this idea that inflation has been higher, and we do need to acknowledge that.  One thing I have learned from going out and talking to the public is that we need to acknowledge what they, and in fact, we are all experiencing.  So I’m sympathetic to that.  But the current paragraph 2 has got this, you know—down, up, underlying inflation, somewhat low, and then we refer to commodity prices as having pushed up “inflation.”  I just think that in talking about this—even as I heard Bill English describe this, he sort of slipped in “headline inflation” when he mentioned that—it needs a modifier.  As it stands, it has the opportunity to rebrand what we mean when we talk about inflation if we don’t have that modifier.  Inflation is a general rise in all prices, and I don’t think we’ve got that uniformity in price increases at the moment.  And, our forecast that you are going to talk about, Mr. Chairman, shows the central tendencies up in 2011, but in 2012, and then rising in 2013.  So it is not just that we are going to decline to rates consistent, but we’re going to go down, and then we are going to go up, and we’re below that.  I’m sympathetic to trying to get this right.  I would, in fact, be willing to talk about the entire path.  And while you can do that during your press conference, this is new territory, and the statement will be out there.  I am nervous about that.  I don’t believe medium-term inflation is too high.  I think we are in fact below the mandate.  I think this is a very notable change in language, and so I want to be very careful on that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their support for alternative B and the announced asset purchases, and agrees with the accommodation policy assumption. They acknowledge that the economy is still below pre-recession levels and express sympathy for the idea that inflation has been higher. They also mention a disagreement with the characterization of the Fed's policies as "monetizing the debt" and express a desire for more specificity when discussing inflation. Overall, there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 303.
 MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention between individuals or parties. It simply introduces someone named Mr. Bullard and mentions that he is addressing a Chairman.


Passage number 304.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states the title or position of President Bullard without providing any further information or context that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 305.
 MR. BULLARD.  I just have one question for President Evans on monetizing the debt.  Some of the options that we look at actually do talk about just leaving the balance sheet larger and operating under a different operating system.  So if we did that, would you consider that monetizing the debt, since that would be a permanent increase in the size of the balance sheet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply asks a question about monetizing the debt and presents a scenario for clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 306.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, I appreciate that, and I think one characterization is this permanent placement.  But, overall, I think inflation is really low, and so the fact that we move to a different operating procedure where maybe we contemplate a floor where more of it would be permanent—I mean, this is not a partnership with the Treasury; this is not Zimbabwe or anything like that or hyperinflation, period.  And to even talk about monetizing the debt—I mean, President Fisher has used words like “dangerous” out in the public, and I think this is not helpful.  So, yes, I would disagree with that characterization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker disagrees with the characterization that the new operating procedure would involve monetizing the debt and compares it to hyperinflation in Zimbabwe.


Passage number 307.
 MR. FISHER.  Is it all right if President Fisher makes a comment.  I am delighted to hear you say it was a temporary phenomenon.  I am especially delighted to hear you make it clear that this is not what we’re going to do.  And I think we have 100 percent agreement at the table.  Thank you for clarifying that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses delight and gratitude for the previous statement, suggesting agreement and a positive tone throughout the conversation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 308.
 MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman—I don’t think we have 100 percent agreement, President Fisher, because you have been saying publicly that we have monetized the debt.  And I don’t think that that was either the intention or the action of this Committee.  So I wonder if you agree with the other part of President Evans’s statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The disagreement arises between Mr. Tarullo and President Fisher regarding the assertion of whether the Committee has monetized the debt. While Mr. Tarullo suggests that it was not the intention or action of the Committee, President Fisher has been publicly stating otherwise.


Passage number 309.
 MR. FISHER.  I believe we temporarily did so.  I believe the numbers are there.  That’s my belief.  The beauty of this Committee is we have a diversity of views.  I don’t want to waste our time on this discussion, Mr. Chairman.  I think we should get back to addressing the alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher expresses his belief that they temporarily addressed a certain issue and presents his opinion that the numbers are there. He also acknowledges the diversity of views within the Committee. However, he does not argue or disagree with anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 310.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Lacker, you’ve got a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response is simply acknowledging and thanking President Lacker.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 311.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I heard you (President Evans) say something about inflation that made me wonder if we understand inflation in the same way.  You said it’s not inflation if it’s not a broad and uniform increase in prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage involves a disagreement or contention between Mr. Lacker and President Evans regarding their understanding of inflation. Mr. Lacker questions President Evans' definition of inflation and indicates potential disagreement in their understanding of the concept.


Passage number 312.
 MR. EVANS.  No.  I said inflation was a general increase in all prices.  I didn’t state it in the negative way that you did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is clarifying a statement he made previously but does not express disagreement or argue with the other person.


Passage number 313.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, so, relative prices change at the same time inflation goes up.  Does the change in relative prices negate there being inflation.  If half the prices go up at 40 percent and the other half don’t change, do we not have 20 percent inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and presenting a hypothetical scenario to seek clarification.


Passage number 314.
 MR. EVANS.  I just think inflation is a monetary phenomenon.  And whether or not we generate a higher increase in all prices, it comes down to the policy assumption that we have here.  Our medium-term inflation forecast is for something lower than that.  This doesn’t look like inflation to me.  Most of our models have a single price index.  We don’t even talk about uniformity of prices.  That’s just my assessment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is stating his personal opinion and assessment about inflation and the factors influencing it. There is no mention of another person or opinion that contradicts his viewpoint.


Passage number 315.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. The statement "President Lockhart" is a neutral statement with no conflicting views or opinions. It simply states the name of a person.


Passage number 316.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I think the situation calls for a steady-as-she-goes posture.  I think there are scenarios that would call for a policy adjustment earlier than I think the Committee would otherwise intend.  But at this juncture I would not signal anything that suggests a change of policy in the near term or any likelihood of deviating from the announced LSAP2 plan.  This could create unnecessary volatility in the economy at this time when crosscurrents have produced somewhat more ambiguity than was the case at the beginning of the year. Turning to the statement, the characterization of the economy in alternative B is broadly consistent with my own reading of the current circumstances and outlook.  Because various TIPS measures are up since the last FOMC meeting, I can see the case for describing longer-term inflation expectations as “generally stable” rather than “stable.”  But I am not convinced longer-term expectations are so out of line as to warrant this potentially significant change in language, which could come close to sounding like an FOMC call to action. I am, I have to say, somewhat sympathetic to President Evans’s suggestion of a modifier.  I think there is some potential for our treatment of inflation in this statement to still be confusing.  But, in some respects, in response to President Plosser’s recommendations, all things considered, I think in this statement I would keep changes limited.  I would introduce few or no new ways of describing or explaining, even if I’m sympathetic with the thinking.  I would put the emphasis on the press conference and try to keep this statement as spare as possible.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses his support for alternative B and his agreement with the characterization of the economy in that alternative. However, he also expresses some reservations about potentially changing the language regarding longer-term inflation expectations. Overall, though, there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 317.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude to Governor Yellen.


Passage number 318.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I consider the current stance of monetary policy to be warranted by economic conditions.  The unemployment rate remains well above its longer-run sustainable rate, and, as I noted in the economic go-round, this gap mainly reflects a shortfall in aggregate demand rather than structural factors.  Moreover, longer-run inflation expectations remain reasonably stable, and I anticipate that headline inflation will subside later this year to a level close to underlying inflation, which remains substantially below my assessment of the mandate-consistent inflation rate.  I expect the economic recovery to continue at a gradual pace and inflation to remain subdued over the next several years.  I, therefore, support the continuation of our forward guidance that the federal funds rate is likely to remain exceptionally low for an extended period. And I support the completion of our $600 billion asset purchase program.  I think the effect of that program began working its way through the pipeline even before we announced it last November, and market expectations have been conditioned all along on the assumption that we would follow through and complete the purchases.  So in response to President Bullard’s argument that we should stop early, I would say that the failure to complete the program would surprise markets, and it would boost longer-term rates right now.  In effect, such a decision would amount to a withdrawal of policy stimulus now, and that’s a policy shift that I don’t consider warranted at this time.  I also think it would impair the Fed’s credibility and unnecessarily whipsaw financial markets. My views on the appropriate path for monetary policy generally accord with the Tealbook baseline, but I see risks to the inflation outlook that could warrant an earlier onset and more rapid pace of policy firming.  In particular, if a continued run-up in commodity prices appeared to be sparking a wage–price spiral, then underlying inflation would begin trending upward and a policy response would be imperative.  In light of the experience of the 1970s, it’s clear we cannot be complacent about the stability of longer-term inflation expectations, and we must be prepared to take decisive action, if needed, to ensure that they remain firmly anchored.  On the other hand, our policy decisions and communications must also take into account the fact that there remain material downside risks to economic activity and inflation.  At our March meeting, we generally agreed that the recovery was on a firmer footing, but the incoming information over the past six weeks has been notably less upbeat. I still expect the recovery to proceed at a moderate pace, and I’m glad we have resumed the exit strategy discussions.  But let’s be mindful of the possibility of déjà vu.  We could still discover over the coming months that the modest pace of GDP growth last quarter was more than just a soft patch.  Given the very high bar for launching a third round of asset purchases, this suggests that we should be cautious about moving too quickly to initiate the process of policy firming. On the various language issues, I do understand the logic of including the bracketed “[generally]” in paragraph 1, and I could certainly live with doing it.  On balance, I guess I do think it would be quite a significant change and would be perceived that way by the markets.  I’d prefer to omit it.  I think longer-term inflation compensation, as measured by TIPS, is within historical ranges, and staff analysis supports the view that the recent uptick since our last meeting is actually due to changing liquidity and inflation risk premiums.  So I could go either way on that, but would prefer to omit it.  And on the language in paragraph 2, on balance, I would support President Evans’s suggestion that we include the modifier “headline” in front of “inflation.”  Finally, I wanted to mention that I really appreciated Narayana’s memo about using the Taylor (1999) rule to gauge the appropriate timing of policy liftoff.  I’ve actually been a long-time proponent of using simple rules as benchmarks for monetary policy, which is not to say at all that we can just put policy on autopilot, blindly following the prescriptions of any single rule.  I don’t think—and the Chairman’s discussion yesterday showed this—that we can use them to absolutely pinpoint a moment when we need to begin tightening.  But I think that giving greater prominence to such rules could facilitate our internal decisionmaking process and would be helpful in explaining what we are doing to the public.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's views and opinions on monetary policy.


Passage number 319.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We are near the end of a third go-round, and I have no case to make for a change in policy.  So I had planned to fly in the face of FOMC tradition and stop speaking, but in listening to all of the discussion, I am struck by “core inflation,” “underlying inflation,” “headline inflation,” “inflation in the medium term,” “inflation expectations,” “inflation projections,” and even now, “unmodified inflation.”  And I think it’s really important, if we are going to build credibility, if we are going to emphasize our commitment, that we start to talk about inflation in the same way and what we mean about it.  This debate between President Evans and President Lacker about what is inflation and rebranding inflation says a lot about where our disagreements are.  I think having disagreements about the level of inflation is one thing, but having disagreements on what we’re talking about when we talk about inflation actually creates a lot of confusion.  And I just don’t think we can build that credibility until we’re all speaking about the same thing.  I was very pleased to hear the Chairman say yesterday that core inflation is now yesterday’s news and that we’re actually going to pay attention and talk about the things that real people are actually seeing and help people understand what that means in terms of inflation.  And I think that’s important in all of our discussions. Moving to the statement, having listened to all of that, I was originally agnostic on having “generally” before “stable” in paragraph 1, but I think we probably ought to leave it out.  It seems like an extra modifier that I wasn’t sure there was a lot of support for. And then, in paragraph 2, I would agree with President Kocherlakota’s suggestion that we go back to “in a context of price stability” at the end of that sentence and leave out “a decline,” because I got to thinking—all right, pushed up inflation to where, and a decline from where, to a level that’s consistent—where’s that level.  It created three questions in my mind, and I think if we go back to the original language on that last sentence, it would be helpful.  I know you disagree with me, Jeff, but anyway, Mr. Chairman, those are my thoughts.  I support alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker in this passage is expressing disagreement with the current way of discussing and defining inflation. They argue that there needs to be a consensus and clarity on the definition of inflation in order to build credibility. They also express disagreement with using the modifier "generally" before "stable" and suggest leaving it out. Finally, they disagree with using "a decline" in a certain sentence and suggest going back to the original language.


Passage number 321.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 322.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as well, but I should say, I support it with the understanding that paragraph 3 genuinely is communicating neutrality with respect to the potential for adjustment of holdings in one direction or another in the future. As people could tell from my remarks yesterday, I’m on the lower end of projections with respect to expectations for economic growth.  I continue to think that growth is going to be a problem.  Monetary policy is becoming trickier, and there’s no question but that the inflation concerns that a lot of people have raised are something that we are going to need to be watching carefully.  But I don’t think at this juncture, given what I heard to be most people’s expectations that these effects would be transitory, that we want to do anything like beginning to move toward the exits, which I think ending reinvestment or changing the language would surely be. With respect to paragraph 2, I found myself sympathetic both with Jeff’s suggestions for changes and with Charlie’s concerns about those changes, because I think Jeff is trying to do what Betsy suggested, regularize the use of the language, which would probably be good for us all.  But I think Charlie’s point is, given how many terms have been used at this point, it might sow more confusion than clarity to do so. So although I actually was comfortable with the two changes that are incorporated here, like Betsy, I am attracted to Narayana’s compromise, which is to say, “other commodities have pushed up inflation in recent months,” but then return to the “in a context of price stability,” and then perhaps allow the Chairman to use a little bit of his time this afternoon to begin this process of clarifying exactly what we mean as we talk about inflation. And I don’t have a strong view on “generally.”  I think, at the margin, I would omit it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and shares their thoughts on economic growth, monetary policy, and inflation concerns. They also discuss their position on paragraph 2 and offer a compromise suggestion. However, there is no clear disagreement or contention present in their statement.


Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It seems to consist of a polite expression of gratitude addressed to Governor Raskin.


Passage number 324.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, because the economic recovery is too halting and uneven to warrant a substantial shift now in the stance of monetary policy.  The unemployment rate has come down, but it remains high relative to other labor market indicators, which show a high number of people wanting full-time work but finding only part-time work.  Wage gains are minimal, and unit labor costs are not changing. Measures of inflation have moved up, reversing a small part of their decline since 2008.  That said, the run-up in energy prices is slowing consumer spending.  In addition, political unrest in the Middle East and North Africa, and the resulting upward pressure on oil prices, have increased the likelihood of an adverse shock to real incomes and to household confidence and, to a lesser extent, business confidence, and thus to private domestic final demand. If there are further increases in oil and commodity prices, and a more-than-transitory spillover to other prices, one could imagine inflation expectations becoming unanchored.  Given these conditions and others that have been discussed, I think that the current stance of monetary policy strikes me as appropriate.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. The author expresses their support for alternative B and provides reasons for their stance without contradicting any other views.


Passage number 325.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Fisher.


Passage number 326.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, I was thinking through what we heard from David Wilcox yesterday, and from the Bank presidents in particular, and the dissonance that is being reported.  My notes to myself summarized them as follows. On economic growth, like the old saw about the music of Wagner, “It’s not as bad as it sounds,” and on inflation, like gangsta rap, it’s worse than it sounds.  I think so much depends, Mr. Chairman, on, really, what you say at this press conference and your comportment, which I am very confident about. In looking at the statement, I think less attention will be paid to the statement than is normal.  Almost as much attention will be paid to you as is being paid to what Kate Middleton will wear at her wedding.  [Laughter]  And I am grateful for that distraction. On the statement, I think Mr. Evans has a very good point.  Here are the facts.  The headline PCE price index posed an annualized rate of increase of 4.9 percent in February.  That’s its fastest one-month rate of increase since June of 2009.  That makes three straight months of headline readings in excess of an annualized 3 percent rate.  I would have no problem with inserting the word “headline” between “pushed up” and “inflation.”  I think he makes a good point.  Generally speaking, I agree with Mr. Lacker’s amendments.  I’m glad that they were reflected in alternative B.  I like President Kocherlakota’s inclusion of “in the context of price stability”—it takes some of the seesaw out.  But I think the most important amendment that’s been suggested thus far was President Plosser’s, which is to conclude the first paragraph by saying, “longer-term inflation expectations remain within historical norms,” et cetera, et cetera.  I believe I heard him say, “indicating” whatever—“over the medium term” rather than the “medium run.”  But I would accept that language. Let me just make a general comment about some of the tempers that seem to have flared during this discussion.  The beauty of this Committee is that it reflects diversity.  There are academics, there are very serious scholars at the table, there are actually three former bankers at the table, and there are people with a supervision and regulation background.  I don’t think we should discourage diversities of view.  I take a chapter out of Oliver Wendell Holmes:  “Do not be bullied out of your common sense.”  And, moreover, that it is very important that we adhere to both education in the obvious as well as investigation of the obscure.  One of the great things about this Committee is we have the talent and capacity to look at things in great depth, but we also have the ability to take soundings in the field.  And, as I mentioned earlier, those soundings I wouldn’t disparage, I would use to complement and supplement what we analytically and intellectually infer from our discussions and from our models. Mr. Chairman, I think that, in addition to the statement and the suggestions that I have just made, the important thing today is really this press conference.  I think it would be prudent for you to make a firm statement in your conference as to our resolve in containing inflation.  I thought your summary, as you presented it at the beginning of this discussion, was spot on.  I was tempted to embrace alternative C and to dissent at this meeting; I will not do so.  I would ask that you do, indeed, focus and reassure the markets about our intent to contain inflation and seek price stability, because there are some doubts out there, whether they are deserved or not.  And I would conclude by saying that you might also consider noting during your press conference that the Committee is aware of, and is monitoring, the resurgence of some financial practices that could prove to be counterproductive.  This is a concern we haven’t discussed as a group and we don’t include in the statement, but I sense it is out there and I would like to put any notion that we are not aware of it to an end. So, in summary, I would support alternative B, with the amendments I mentioned, particularly the end of the first paragraph with President Plosser’s suggestion.  I would insert the word “headline” before “pushed up inflation,” because that, indeed, is the fact.  And I would accept Narayana’s truncation of the last sentence in paragraph 2.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with various points made by other individuals and offering suggestions, but there is no clear disagreement or conflict present in the passage.


Passage number 327.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 328.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  I support alternative B.  In terms of our large-scale asset purchase program, we should finish the $600 billion.  Stopping here would send an inappropriately strong signal that we’re starting to remove accommodation relative to the actual effect that the $170 billion would actually have.  You would have a very strong market reaction relative to what the actual effect would be on the balance sheet. With respect to future large-scale asset purchase programs, I get the sense from the Committee that the bar is quite high for a couple of reasons.  One, deflation is no longer a significant risk.  Two, the economy looks better than last summer, and three, which hasn’t been mentioned, there is more interest rate risk as the size of our balance sheet increases.  So while the language in paragraph 3 is neutral in terms of prepared to adjust up or down, I view the bar as pretty high to further large-scale asset purchase programs, at least at this time based on what we know about the outlook today. In terms of the statement, there is this question about whether inflation expectations are “stable” or whether inflation expectations are “generally stable.”  You know, we debated this in New York, and we came to the conclusion that “generally stable” was probably a more accurate description of what we’re actually seeing.  And I guess my preference is to have paragraph 1 call it how we see it and not shade it because of worries about market reaction.  That said, I do agree that the change will be noticed, but I think that being as accurate as possible is important in terms of maintaining our credibility.  Putting in the word “generally” could actually be productive in the sense that it might show a greater concern about inflation expectations, which might keep inflation expectations better anchored.  It could prove beneficial to us rather than problematic, and I do favor putting in “generally.” In terms of President Plosser’s suggestion of historical norms, I guess my problem there is:  What time period does “historical norm” apply to.  Does it include the 1965–82 period.  And how do we feel about it being within historical norms.  There’s no view of whether the idea of historical norms is acceptable or not, so I think it’s a little vague in terms of how people would interpret it. In terms of paragraph 2, I favor keeping the last sentence unchanged, “in the context of price stability,” because it avoids this low-high-low pattern of that paragraph in introducing so many different concepts.  I think it keeps the paragraph simpler, and, to President Lockhart’s point, maintains our practice of only making changes when we think the changes are actually necessary and a distinct improvement.  If people don’t want to do that, I could accept it.  I could certainly accept inserting the word “headline” or “overall” as the modifier to the inflation rate in that paragraph.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a statement of the speaker's opinions and preferences on various topics related to the economy and monetary policy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 329.
 MR. EVANS.  I agree with your characterization, Mr. Chairman.  It’s really the last part, where it mentions a decline in inflation to rates consistent with the Federal Reserve’s mandate, that made me think differently about it.  If you drop that one along the lines of President Kocherlakota, I do not have a problem with the “pushed up inflation in recent months.”  That’s just fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, agrees with most of the characterization but disagrees with the mention of a decline in inflation. He suggests dropping that part.


Passage number 330.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I don’t want to complicate it further, but you could say, “gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization and to levels of inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s mandate,” without getting into ups and downs.  That would be another way to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply suggesting an alternative way of expressing a concept without adding complexity.


Passage number 331.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it’s easier just to keep it the way it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states their personal opinion about how to handle a situation and does not express any disagreement with others.


Passage number 332.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I withdraw that then.  All right.  So those are two questions.  I’m going to take a straw vote on both of these in just a minute, but does anyone want to make a further comment—let’s start with the first one, on inflation expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply requesting input or further comments on the topic of inflation expectations.


Passage number 333.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman.  Can I just make an observation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply requesting permission to make an observation.


Passage number 334.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 335.
 MR. PLOSSER.  It’s about two pieces of the language that are tied together.  One is the issue of what we mean by underlying inflation.  That was what I was trying to address.  And I understand what you’re saying.  We use it several times, so we’ve got to figure out a way around, but I think we need to work our way out of that language.  And the second is the context of price stability.  I’ve never quite understood exactly what that meant, and I think part of President Lacker’s effort was to get away from that.  I would be happy if we made a commitment for the staff, as we move through the next set of languages, to try to clean up both of those concepts in a way that we’re consistent through this, which I think was what your earlier suggestion was.  I think that’s going to be important going forward for us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 336.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Well, again, certainly the staff, Bill and others, hear that.  Point taken.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the point raised by Bill and others without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 337.
 MR. LACKER.  If I could just add to that.  Betsy is right and you’re right, I think, that we need to take a systematic look at the language that we use to communicate about inflation.  I don’t think we’re far apart at all on the facts.  I think we all understand it.  It’s choosing the language to communicate what there is a consensus about. I think, broad brush:  The recovery is continuing, we know inflation is high, and it’s going to come down.  Those are the three things we want to communicate with the statement, and to go back to the context of price stability is to rely on people comparing context of price stability and high current inflation and realizing, oh, they’re saying it’s going to come down.  I mean, to me, it’s an oblique and, to my mind, unnecessarily indirect way of stating, “We expect inflation to come down.”  So I just wanted to get that point in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is agreeing with both Betsy and the person they are addressing, stating that they need to choose the language to communicate the consensus about inflation. The speaker also agrees with the three points that need to be communicated and expresses their opinion about the indirect way of stating it. However, there is no indication of disagreement or contention between the speaker and the other person in the passage.


Passage number 338.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that’s a perfectly viable option, as long as we put in “headline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses personal opinion and does not present any conflicting views or disagreement.


Passage number 339.
” MR. LACKER.  Yes, I’m not against putting in “headline.”  I mean, I think over time we’re going to want to drop that.  We could use “overall” just as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any active disagreement or contention. It simply presents an individual's opinion and preference.


Passage number 340.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, “overall” would actually be even better, I think.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 341.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Earlier in that paragraph we do say that we expect these effects to be transitory, so we are setting up the idea of why we think that we’re going back to price stability.  If we hadn’t mentioned the transitory nature, I would be more in agreement with you, but we do mention it.  So that, I think, sets up what follows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining that they agree with the other person's point because they have already mentioned the transitory nature of the effects they are discussing.


Passage number 342.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, that’s true.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Yes, that's true." is simply agreeing with a previous statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 343.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’ll say a couple things.  First, I think references to “headline” should be avoided.  I think in the systematic overview of language that will take place in the next six weeks we will regret using that language.  The use of the term price stability is to connote two things at once, and perhaps it’s too oblique to do that.  One is that inflation will decline from its current high levels, but it’s also to say that underlying inflation will return from its current low levels to 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting avoiding the use of certain language, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 344.
 MR. LACKER.  What’s “underlying inflation,” in this context.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply asks for a clarification or definition of the term "underlying inflation."


Passage number 345.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating Mr. Kocherlakota's name, without any context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 346.
  I think of “underlying inflation” as being our best possible forecast— MR. LACKER.  Forecast is going to return to—.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and view on the concept of "underlying inflation."


Passage number 347.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Our actual forecast is for inflation to do this—to go up, and to come down below, and then to reach target from below.  I think it’s a very subtle and artistic forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 348.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  It doesn’t say what our forecast is going to do, what we expect our forecast to do, which is different than what we forecast inflation to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 349.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Okay.  President Lacker, would you be okay for this meeting to restore the ambiguity of “in a context of price stability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a series of statements and a question asking for agreement or permission.


Passage number 350.
” MR. LACKER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that show disagreement or contention. It merely states that someone named Mr. Lacker responded with "yes."


Passage number 351.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  That’s with the understanding that this is not a satisfactory situation.  I think President Kocherlakota’s point about starting to throw in “headline,” adding yet another term, is going to be an issue.  So I’m perfectly okay with “pushed up inflation in recent months” because I think that’s accurate, if that’s okay with everybody. All right.  Let’s restore the last sentence of alternative B, paragraph 2, and keep the change “have pushed up inflation,” not “headline inflation”—“have pushed up inflation in recent months.” So then our remaining question is about inflation expectations.  Let me just see first if there’s a plurality to leave it where it is, and if there isn’t—let’s vote the following way.  Change or no change, and then if there’s a change, we’ll figure out which change is better.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, there is discussion and decision-making, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention. The speaker is seeking input and agreement from others, but there is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 352.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Can I just say one thought that just occurred to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple request for permission to share a thought and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 353.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without knowing the specific passage, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 354.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Rather than “recent historical norms,” you could say, “inflation expectations remain at acceptable levels.”  That doesn’t address the volatility of them necessarily.  But maybe that connotes too much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is providing an alternative wording suggestion and acknowledging that it may not fully address the concern about volatility. However, he does not express disagreement with the original statement.


Passage number 355.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s a little anxiety producing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This statement is a personal opinion and does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply expresses that the situation mentioned is causing a small amount of anxiety.


Passage number 356.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes, I withdraw that.  I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser withdraws a statement, apologizing for his mistake.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 357.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  In the interest of coffee, I’m now going to ask how many people would like to just leave the characterization of inflation expectations as “remained stable,” and how many would like to consider an alternative.  How many would like to say “remained stable”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for a vote or consensus on whether to stick with the characterization of inflation expectations as "remained stable" or to consider an alternative. The existence of different options suggests a disagreement or difference of opinion among the people involved.


Passage number 358.
  [Show of hands] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Well, ten is a majority, so we’ll just keep that language.  Any other comments or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement giving information about the majority decision of using a specific language.


Passage number 359.
  [No response] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Again, I thank you for both your input and your willingness to work flexibly with the Committee.  We’re ready for a vote.  Debbie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of gratitude and readiness for a vote.


Passage number 360.
 MS. DANKER.  This is on alternative B, the statement in the handout, as well as the directive.  In the handout, it is as written in the handout.  The “generally” is struck, and the final sentence of paragraph 2 reads, “The Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability.”  Chairman Bernanke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. DANKER is simply stating what is written in the handout and providing clarification on the changes made to the language.


Passage number 361.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Do you want “continues to” to go back in there so that the sentence is staying the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on whether or not a certain phrase should be included in the sentence.


Passage number 362.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Shouldn’t we make the last sentence identical to the previous statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence in question is about making the last sentence identical to the previous statement and does not express any conflicting opinions or disagreements.


Passage number 363.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That is what I was suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their suggestion or idea.


Passage number 364.
 MS. DANKER.  Keep “continues to.”  Okay.  All right.  “Continues to” is now in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the suggestion to include the phrase "continues to" and agrees to include it.


Passage number 365.
 Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke  Yes President Evans  Yes President Fisher  Yes President Kocherlakota Yes President Plosser  Yes Governor Raskin  Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes Governor Yellen  Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  We are very efficient.  The next meeting is June 21 and 22.  As you know, the press conference is at 2:15 p.m.  If anyone is here and wants to see it, there will be a screening available in the Special Library across the hall. In a moment I will call the end of the meeting and then have coffee, and for those who would stay, Linda Robertson will present a congressional update—optional.  And now we are still having lunch, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the participants in a meeting and the schedule of events.


Passage number 366.
 MS. DANKER.  I think they’re going to bring it at 11:30.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the opinion of Ms. Danker on when something will be brought.


