Passage number 1.
 Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on January 25–26, 2011 January 25—Afternoon Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We will come to order.  The new members of the Committee this year are Presidents Evans, Fisher, Kocherlakota, and Plosser.  First Vice President Moore is once again serving for San Francisco.  Is First Vice President Pat Barron here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It is simply providing information about the attendees of the meeting.


Passage number 2.
 MR. BARRON.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only includes a simple response to a statement or question without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  This is Pat’s last meeting, because he’s retiring.  Let me congratulate you and thank you for your service in Atlanta.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing congratulations and gratitude towards Pat for their service.


Passage number 4.
  [Applause] MR. BARRON.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply thanking the audience for their applause.


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  This is our organizational meeting, so we have our usual items.  The first item is electing Committee officers.  Governor Yellen, do you have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the agenda for the meeting and asking if Governor Yellen has a motion.


Passage number 6.
 MS. YELLEN.  I would like to move the nomination of Ben Bernanke as Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the person (Ms. Yellen) wants to move the nomination of Ben Bernanke as Chairman.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And I would like it to be known that I meet the residency requirement.  [Laughter]  Are there other nominations.  [No response]  In favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Opposed.  [No response]  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they meet the residency requirement, there is laughter, and then asks for any other nominations with no response. They then ask for those in favor and there is a chorus of "ayes." There is no opposition or disagreement indicated.


Passage number 8.
 MS. YELLEN.  I would like to nominate Bill Dudley as Vice Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that Ms. Yellen would like to nominate Bill Dudley as Vice Chair, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 9.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Comments.  Other nominations.  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Opposed.  [No response]  Thank you. All right, we now turn to the nominated staff officers of the Committee.  Debbie will read the list.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage includes comments, other nominations, and a chorus of "ayes" in favor, with no opposition. The phrase "thank you" indicates a positive response.


Passage number 10.
 MS. DANKER.  Secretary and Economist, William English; Deputy Secretary, Deborah Danker; Assistant Secretaries, Matthew Luecke, David Skidmore, and Michelle Smith; General Counsel, Scott Alvarez; Deputy General Counsel, Thomas Baxter; Assistant General Counsel, Richard Ashton; Economists, Nathan Sheets and David Stockton; Associate Economists from the Board, James Clouse, Thomas Connors, Steven Kamin, David Reifschneider, and David Wilcox; Associate Economists from the Reserve Banks, Simon Potter, Loretta Mester, Daniel Sullivan, Harvey Rosenblum, and Kei-Mu Yi.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply lists the names and positions of individuals in an organization. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 11.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other nominations.  [No response]  It’s a very good group.  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Opposed.  [No response]  Thank you. Next we have to select a Reserve Bank to execute transactions for the Open Market Account.  New York once again is willing to serve.  Any other nominations.  [No response]  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Opposed.  [No response]  Thank you. The manager of the System Open Market Account, Brian Sack, is once again willing to serve.  The New York Bank will have to ratify that if he is elected.  Other nominations.  [No response]  In favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.  [No response]  Thank you. The next item is the proposed revisions to the Program for Security of FOMC Information.  This is the memorandum that was circulated to you from Scott and Debbie.  It makes two changes to the current Program for Security.  The most important change sets out a process for investigating breaches of FOMC security that involves an evaluation by the General Counsel and the Secretary in the first round, and then, if a second round is necessary, the Inspector General of the Board has agreed to investigate.  Just for clarity, my sense is that we are trying to address breaches related to the discussion of materials prepared for the meeting, such as the agenda, memos, briefings, and other sorts of things that are part of the background for the meeting, as well as descriptions of what happened at the meeting, characterizations of other people’s comments, and so on.  What we do not intend to address here is the expression of your own views, your own policy assessments, and so on.  So we’re trying to keep the meeting itself separate and not disclose the items I mentioned. Regarding the second change, the Chairman already has authority to make special exceptions for disclosure of information, and, obviously, there are legitimate reasons for this.  The change now specifies that, in doing so, the Chairman should inform the Committee when those exceptions are made.  I would like to note that there are some routine, minor, administrative cases, such as allowing a noncitizen staff member to participate in producing the minutes or assigning the work to a transcriber who works with the tapes.  Of course, I will inform you of things like that if you so desire, but I hope that such minor administrative matters of that sort will be excepted. This memorandum was circulated, and there were no comments.  I’d like to open the floor for some brief comments now, and I hope that we can vote on it as part of the organizational section of this meeting.  However, if the Committee feels that a more lengthy discussion is necessary, we do have a longer period of time tomorrow on communications, so, if necessary, we can defer it until then.  Would anyone like to comment on the memorandum.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 12.
 MR. TARULLO.  May I ask a question about it, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply indicates that Mr. Tarullo wants to ask a question to the Chairman. There is no apparent disagreement or contention.


Passage number 13.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of Governor Tarullo does not provide enough context to determine whether there is disagreement or not.


Passage number 14.
 MR. TARULLO.  Janet, could you give a little more context for the kinds of information that the subcommittee had in mind in thinking about the need for a better, more stringent process.  I am thinking of this more as a lawyer rather than as a member of the FOMC, so I think it would be helpful to make sure that everybody understands what actually is being proscribed and why it’s being proscribed.  For example, there’s a lot of information in the Tealbook every six weeks, and I don’t think any of us think that information needs to get Class I confidentiality treatment, certainly not as time goes on.  So my question, then, is how people, particularly staff, are to be able to distinguish what was intended by the Committee in making these revisions, on the one hand, as opposed, on the other hand, to the literal embrace of the language of the revised regulation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 15.
 MS. YELLEN.  Our intention was consistent with what the Chairman just said.  We’re concerned about potential leaks of documents or their contents that are discussed in an FOMC meeting as well as leaks about the substance of discussions, such as who said what.  As far as publicizing past data that just happened to appear in the Tealbook, such as historical movements in the exchange rate, I wouldn’t think of that as a violation. We’re certainly not trying to be legalistic about this.  We wanted to add a procedure to cover what happens if there are violations.  It begins with a process of triage in which anything that’s reported to the Secretariat would be reviewed by the Secretary, the General Counsel, and the Chairman, and only things that are considered to be significant breaches would go to investigation.  I think that section VII tries to make that clear, namely, that things have to be judged to rise above a certain threshold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, is explaining their intention and concerns regarding leaks of documents and discussions in FOMC meetings, as well as their procedure for handling violations. She clarifies that only significant breaches would be investigated.


Passage number 16.
 MR. TARULLO.  Can I give one concrete example.  I won’t belabor this.  Suppose a senior staff person is speaking to a group of academic economists and refers to the staff projections for housing prices over the coming year, something which I, at least, receive only in the form of the Tealbook.  Some other memo may produce that information, of course, but that’s where I see what the staff expects.  Is that information intended to be proscribed or not intended to be proscribed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about whether certain information is intended to be prohibited or not.


Passage number 17.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that would be proscribed because it represents an official view of the staff.  However, if the staff member said, “here are some factors that suggest that house prices may decline,” without attributing it to the staff or to the Tealbook or to the FOMC, then I think that’s acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is discussing the acceptability of different statements without expressing conflicting opinions.


Passage number 18.
 MR. TARULLO.  Just out of curiosity, does that apply to us, too, for example, during testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 19.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  As you know, the Chairman has some special responsibilities, for example, to report to the Congress twice a year and so on.  In such testimony, I have talked, for example, about the projections, which, of course, typically come out at about the same time as the testimony, and I described the objectives and the rationale of the Committee.  I would argue that that’s an appropriate thing to do. I think it’s also fine—and, in fact, desirable—for a member of the Committee to speak publicly along the following lines after, say, a decision made by the Committee:  “Here’s what we, the Committee, decided.  Here’s the logic behind this decision.  Here’s what we think this action may do.”  I think that is all fine.  Again, the things we’re trying to avoid are, first of all, the leakage of confidential materials, which are, obviously, not materials that could easily be replicated by any outsider using, for example, FRED from the St. Louis Fed, and, second, the leakage of characterizations of discussions taking place within the meeting, such as who said what.  In contrast, discussing the sense of the Committee and the goals of the Committee or the individuals’ outlooks and policy views is entirely appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 20.
 MS. YELLEN.  Suppose something came out in the minutes that described the staff projection, and it happened to say that in this round the staff lowered its forecast for house prices.  That would be fine, but anything that wasn’t in the minutes about Tealbook projections wouldn’t be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Yellen is simply stating a hypothetical scenario and explaining the limitations of information that is not included in the minutes.


Passage number 21.
 MR. EVANS.  In the house price example, it’s pretty easy.  I usually just say that I’ve seen a number of analyses from the private sector where many people are calling for a further price decline of 10 percent or whatever, and I would assume that’s unobjectionable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that they have seen analyses predicting a further price decline, which they assume is an uncontroversial statement.


Passage number 22.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 23.
 MR. HOENIG.  My thought is a little different. I don’t get too confused on what I can say about data and what it may mean.  But when I read articles in the paper that say, “Inside the FOMC there were discussions, and so-and-so said this and so-and-so said that,” to me, that’s an obvious a violation.  In that case, you might call for a review or an investigation—whatever word you want to use.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's thoughts and concerns about reading articles that disclose discussions within the FOMC.


Passage number 24.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  There are news stories that say that the FOMC is considering options for what to do with their LSAP program, for example.  Now, that is something that a reporter could pull together from speeches and interviews that are entirely legitimate.  And I don’t think that that’s necessarily a problem.  However, a verbatim or nearly verbatim report of the debate at the FOMC with some of the specific arguments or numbers would clearly be a violation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It discusses the possibility of news stories being a legitimate compilation of information, but also highlights that a verbatim report of the FOMC debate would be a violation.


Passage number 25.
 MR. HOENIG.  Right.  It’s usually a judgment call, but the clear indicators are when they start going inside the meeting and saying, “This was discussed,” and, “here’s where so-and-so or such-and-such came out.”  I think that’s where you get the issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their perspective on indicators that may suggest issues in a meeting.


Passage number 26.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s correct.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, because there is no statement or position being argued or challenged. The phrase "That's correct" simply acknowledges the accuracy of a previous statement without expressing any disagreement or debate.


Passage number 27.
 MR. LACKER.  We submit projections for various meetings, but we also talk in public about the outlook, and I’m assuming that that’s fair game, namely, that I can report my projection in public and submit the same projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no direct contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the process of submitting projections for various meetings and talking about the outlook publicly. The phrase "I’m assuming that that’s fair game" suggests a level of agreement or acceptance of the practice.


Passage number 28.
 MS. YELLEN.  I think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information to indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 29.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: It is not clear from the given passage who President Fisher is or what the situation is concerning them. Without more context, it is difficult to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 30.
 MR. FISHER.  I’d like to pick up on Tom’s point.  It’s not just what’s said in the meeting; it’s also very importantly the materials that were prepared for the meeting.  I’m not a lawyer, as you know, so I view this as a sort of housekeeping issue—it’s restating an ethic, and the ethic is that we do our utmost to maintain confidentiality of things that others might profit from or otherwise use improperly.  I think you basically know what it is and know what it’s not.  To me, this is just an updating—for example, we had to update the word Greenbook to Tealbook.  We worked a lot on this, but the more I thought about it, the more it seemed to me that this is just a housekeeping matter and that we need to bring it into the modern era, particularly given the kind of scrutiny we’re getting.  I wouldn’t read too much into it beyond the fact that we clearly have an ethic here which I think (1) needs to be preserved and (2) needs to be as pristine as possible.  How you put a precise legal definition on that is probably beyond my capacity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker does not express any disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 31.
 MR. TARULLO.  Just to be clear, the reason I raise this question is principally because of the staff throughout the System.  They’re going to be reading something which they were not present at the creation of, and they just need to be able to understand what the implications of this are for them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a concern about the staff's understanding of a document.


Passage number 32.
 MS. YELLEN.  Dan, it’s our intention to try to devise a set of guidelines for the staff after this is approved for the FOMC.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the intention of Ms. Yellen to create guidelines for the staff after the approval of something for the FOMC.


Passage number 33.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments.  [No response]  Are we okay voting on this now.  In favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.  [No response]  Okay, thank you. We turn to the next item, authorization for Desk operations.  This is the annual authorization, right, Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward conversation where everyone is in agreement with the proposed action.


Passage number 34.
 MR. SACK.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any specific statements or arguments that would suggest contention or disagreement. It simply consists of a statement or response by Mr. Sack, without any conflicting ideas or conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me turn it over to you to introduce it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Let me turn it over to you to introduce it" suggests a cooperative and inclusive tone, where the speaker is handing over the floor to someone else to provide an introduction.


Passage number 36.
 MR. SACK.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At its first meeting each year, the Committee reviews the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, as well as the set of guidelines that governs foreign currency transactions. Regarding the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, I recommend that this authorization be renewed without amendment.  Even though I am not requesting any changes, I would like to update the Committee on several items related to the domestic authorization. First, I recommend that the Committee keep suspended the Guidelines for the Conduct of System Operations in Federal-Agency Issues, as it is unclear whether future transactions in these securities may be necessary to achieve the Committee’s monetary policy objectives. Second, the current authorization allows the Desk to transact in agency MBS for the SOMA through agents, such as asset managers and custodian banks.  The Federal Reserve Bank of New York continues to evaluate the extent to which some of the services provided by these agents could be brought in-house.  However, some external services are likely to be needed for an extended period, given the unique features of MBS.  I am thus asking that this authority be retained. Third, the Committee authorized the New York Fed, under a resolution passed on November 24, 2009, to conduct small-scale reverse repo operations as needed to ensure the operational readiness of that tool across all types of eligible collateral and with a broader set of counterparties.  We anticipate a need to conduct additional small-scale operations during 2011, particularly as additional counterparties are approved.  These operations are covered under the current resolution. Let me now turn to an item that will likely come before the Committee for authorization at a future date.  In June 2009, the Committee received an informational memo on a proposed policy to address the occurrence of daylight overdrafts in foreign central bank accounts at the New York Fed by providing intraday liquidity through daylight repurchase agreements, or DLRPs.  We have now settled on a proposed procedure for DLRPs, and the New York Fed hopes to obtain approval in 2011 to commence implementation under Regulation N.  At that time, I will review the proposal with the Committee and will ask it for a change in the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations that would allow the New York Fed to provide DLRPs. With regard to the authorization for foreign currency operations, the Desk operates under the following set of guidelines from the Committee: the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations, the Foreign Currency Directive, and the Procedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency Operations.  I recommend all three be renewed without amendment.  Please note that the vote to reaffirm these documents will include approval of the System’s warehousing agreement with the Treasury.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making recommendations and providing updates on various matters.


Passage number 37.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions for Brian.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement expressing gratitude and a request for questions directed towards Brian.


Passage number 38.
 MR. LACKER.  Brian, how do the daylight repurchase agreement procedures that you settled on to implement this differ from collateralized daylight overdrafts that all the Reserve Banks make available to domestic banking institutions.  And if they differ, why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a question asked by Mr. Lacker to Brian regarding the differences between daylight repurchase agreement procedures and collateralized daylight overdrafts. The question seems to be seeking clarification or an explanation rather than expressing disagreement.


Passage number 39.
 MR. SACK.  The intent of the policy is similar, of course, in that it’s to provide collateral on intraday credit extended.  In the course of business for regular FIMA accounts, daylight overdrafts inevitably occur, given the volume of transactions that take place in them.  The proposed procedure essentially identifies assets that are currently held in their accounts that will either be earmarked as collateral for these transactions or that, in some cases, could even be moved to a separate account for those who are heavier users.  Although it’s similar in intent, it’s also a little different, because we manage these custodial accounts already, which have assets in them, so it’s a slightly different procedure in terms of allocating that collateral for this purpose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing an explanation of the proposed procedure.


Passage number 40.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is because the passage only states the topic of "Other questions" and mentions the position of "Vice Chairman," but does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 41.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I wanted to introduce Julie Remache, who is sitting next to Brian Sack.  This is her first time at an FOMC meeting.  Welcome, Julie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 42.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Welcome.  Other questions for Brian.  [No response] Seeing no further questions, are we prepared to vote on these two authorizations.  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes].  All opposed.  [No response]  Thank you. Now for the entertainment portion of our program, [laughter] the staffs of the Board and the Reserve Banks have prepared a special topic on structural unemployment.  I was very impressed with the amount of work and the range of research that’s being done on this topic, so I’m looking forward very much to hearing their overview.  Let me turn to Dave Stockton to start it off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage primarily consists of a speaker addressing a group and there is no indication of any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 43.
 MR. STOCKTON.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Obviously the issue of structural unemployment has come up quite frequently, and discussions around the table in the last couple of years have involved trying to grapple with the implications of this really deep recession and the sort of imprint it might be leaving on labor markets.  Simultaneously, the research community of the Federal Reserve has been hard at work on this issue.  While we consider the work we’ve done thus far to be more of a progress report than “the final word” on the topic, last week we did post 10 papers and a rather lengthy summary memo, and I think the page length was roughly equivalent to that of War and Peace.  [Laughter] Today we have three presentations that could be characterized as a very intelligent set of CliffsNotes reviewing that work.  Bruce Fallick is going to introduce some of the key issues and discuss how the Board staff has incorporated some features of structural change in labor markets into the Tealbook projection.  Then Jason Faberman and Ayşegül Şahin will discuss and summarize the large body of research that System economists have been producing, looking at a number of specific aspects of how developments of the past few years may have affected the behavior of labor markets.  I’d like to express my appreciation for the very considerable efforts of Loretta Mester, Dan Sullivan, and Bill Wascher in organizing this session.  It was, needless to say, a very big job, and they executed it with their characteristic energy and insight.  Now I’ll turn the floor over to Bruce.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an overview of the work and presentations that have been done on the issue of structural unemployment. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 44.
 MR. FALLICK.  Thank you.  We asked the research staffs at the 12 Reserve Banks to provide estimates of concepts at least somewhat analogous to the Board staff’s estimates of the effective NAIRU.  The table at the top of the final exhibit shows these estimates, as well as the Tealbook assumptions, for three points: before the financial crisis in 2007, the current time, and 2015, as well as the increase between the first two points.  The numbers for the current period include the effects of extended unemployment benefits for the Board and for those Reserve Banks that thought them relevant and included them in their estimates.  The lower panels show the estimates graphically, with the larger bubbles representing a larger number of Reserve Banks.  The panel to the left shows the levels; the panel to the right shows the increase from before the crisis to the current time.  The pre-crisis estimates cluster around 5 percent, although they range as high as 7½ percent.  Most viewed structural unemployment as having increased since then, and many expect the increase to be mostly reversed by 2015.  The estimated increases are centered around 1½ percentage points, but they range from essentially zero to 2½ percentage points.  Moreover, I think I can say without fear of contradiction that a considerable range of uncertainty surrounds each of our estimates.  We would be happy to take your questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 45.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much again for very thorough, comprehensive work.  Beth Anne, you’re available for questions, too, is that right.  Yes.  Beth Anne will take international questions. Are there any questions for our colleagues.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage consists of expressions of gratitude, confirmation of availability, and a request for questions.


Passage number 46.
 MR. FISHER.  In the last table, it’s not clear to me whether those are our NAIRUs—or what are those numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing his confusion and seeking clarification on a particular table or set of numbers.


Passage number 47.
 MR. FALLICK.  That depends.  Each Bank was asked to provide an estimate of that quantity that the staff thought would be useful in this context.  We would describe that as a NAIRU; in other cases it was described as an unemployment rate consistent with price flexibility, or an unemployment rate that is not susceptible to monetary policy.  A variety of definitions were provided.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply describes different definitions of a concept (NAIRU) provided by different banks. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 48.
 MR. FISHER.  I would caution you that it depends on what your thinking was pre-crisis versus post-crisis.  For example, a lot of our thinking in Dallas has been conditioned by questioning the basic principle of the NAIRU because of globalization in terms of workforce capacity and the willingness of people to hire and where they wish to hire.  So, the Dallas Fed indicates a minimal increase in the NAIRU, but we’ve been thinking about it this way for years, before the crisis.  The work you’ve done is great, and this has been an illuminating discussion, but I just wanted to know what this table is purporting to show, and I would caution you against reading too much into the table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is mostly the speaker expressing caution and seeking clarification about the table's purport.


Passage number 49.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I guess what I took from the table—and you can certainly build on this, Bruce—is that there was a considerable range and a considerable amount of uncertainty about each of these points.  Would that be a fair conclusion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 50.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, that was his point.  Well-summarized.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher's point is simply being acknowledged as well-summarized.


Passage number 51.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Questions, comments.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It seems to be a neutral statement encouraging questions or comments from the audience.


Passage number 52.
 MR. LACKER.  This is a question for Ayşegül.  The notion of mismatch depends critically on the notion of heterogeneity among workers and among worker–firm matches.  In the literature on income inequality, there has been a fair amount of effort devoted over decades to the measured dispersion of income across workers.  A lot of that work uses detailed demographic data to explain some of those differences, but there’s still a fairly substantial amount of variation across workers’ incomes that’s not attributable to any observable characteristics.  My understanding is that the magnitude of that dispersion has increased, that is, the amount attributable to unobservable characteristics has increased.  I also have the impression from this mismatch literature and from the excellent introduction given by all of the staff papers that the number of observable characteristics of workers and firms that is used in these investigations is much smaller than in the inequality literature, where you have fairly extensive demographic data.  Therefore, you’d expect the heterogeneity that is unmeasured by the econometrician to be much larger here than in the inequality literature results.  In your investigation, you’ve failed to find evidence for mismatch, but of course, there could be mismatch that you’re just not measuring.  So I wonder if you’d be willing to characterize your sense of the extent to which available data sources, like JOLTS and the others that you’ve exploited, are able to capture heterogeneity that might be relevant to mismatch or the extent to which there’s unmeasured heterogeneity floating around that leaves us uncertain about the conclusion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their understanding and asking for clarification or confirmation from Ayşegül.


Passage number 53.
 MS. ŞAHIN.  That’s an excellent question.  We know from Mincer-style regressions, as you said, that we can only explain up to 35 percent of variation in wages by looking at observable characteristics.  So the approach that we took is to try to understand the characteristics of unemployed workers and try to match them with the job openings that we have been seeing.  Unfortunately, the biggest restriction while doing this exercise was on the worker side.  On the worker side, we could observe the industries and their occupations, but other than that, we could not really observe much.  So our hope is to get UI records—from certain states, at least—and try to use information about unemployed workers to come up with more detailed measures of mismatch.  We hope these will include demographics, locations of the workers, education levels, experience levels, et cetera.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about their research approach and the limitations they faced.


Passage number 54.
 MR. LACKER.  That’s interesting.  I have another question, Mr. Chairman.  The presentation is titled “Briefing on Structural Unemployment.”  At one point in the discussion, you connected this to the NAIRU, and at another point there was discussion of a category of change in unemployment that was ruled out of your change in structural unemployment on the grounds that it was cyclical.  This has me puzzled as to whether there’s any reason to care about structural unemployment other than for its implications for policy dynamics and the NAIRU.  Do we have an independent interest in some concept called structural unemployment, or is this all about the NAIRU and I should just go back to thinking about economics the way I usually do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 55.
 MR. FALLICK.  I was trying to represent only the Board staff’s view of the matter, which sees it in terms of a NAIRU.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the perspective of Mr. Fallick representing the Board staff's view of the matter, which sees it in terms of a NAIRU (non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment).


Passage number 56.
 MR. LACKER.  I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is simply acknowledging that he sees something.


Passage number 57.
 MR. FALLICK.  Obviously, as the previous discussion of terminology made clear, I think, there may be a variety of views around the System about whether that equation is reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that there may be different views within the System about the reasonableness of the equation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 58.
 MR. LACKER.  You have this EDO model that’s in the class of post-1970s general equilibrium models, many of which have the property that any shock affecting economic activity affects the NAIRU, and thus, you would expect the NAIRU to fluctuate at a cyclical frequency.  I’m wondering whether that property of that model has influenced the staff’s thinking about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a statement made by Mr. Lacker, and it is not clear whether his statement has caused any contention or disagreement among the staff members.


Passage number 59.
 MR. FALLICK.  I think it’s fair to say that the concepts that are inherent in EDO do not track well the description of structural unemployment that I’ve given here.  Of course, that’s only one input into the staff thinking, even in terms of econometric models.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that their perspective on EDO (economic development organization) may not align well with the description of structural unemployment they have given. However, they also acknowledge that this is just one input into the staff's thinking and that there are other factors and models to consider.


Passage number 60.
 MR. STOCKTON.  But obviously we’ve devoted a great deal of resources to EDO.  We’re looking at the forecasts of that model meeting by meeting and trying to understand the coherence between those forecasts and those of both of our other large-scale macro models, FRB/US and the staff judgmental forecast.  We are paying attention to EDO, looking at its output and thinking about what its implications are for our forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is evident from the use of phrases such as "we're looking at," "trying to understand," "paying attention to," and "thinking about," which indicate a collaborative and open-minded approach to analyzing the forecasts.


Passage number 61.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, in that effort, there are two objectives that I would assume you’d be interested in.  One is just the pure forecasting, and the other is policy advising.  I think the implications are very different from models like your EDO model, in which the counterpart of NAIRU could be as high as 8.9 percent (which is where I think the St. Louis Fed has it and which is also close to my estimate—no matter what my staff said [laughter]) and from models where your reference level of unemployment—what you call structural unemployment or NAIRU—is, by design, filtering out business cycle frequency influences.  The urgency of some of our discussions around here obviously depends on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 62.
 MR. EVANS.  Could you remind us what the forces in EDO are that would have the unemployment rate move around the way that President Lacker is talking about.  I just don’t recall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a request for clarification or reminder of information.


Passage number 63.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Why don’t I step in here.  First, different DSGE models have different shocks embedded in them, and EDO probably has more than your typical DSGE model.  One of the things in EDO is an economywide risk premium shock—that’s how it’s labeled.  That shock explains the overwhelming percentage of the slump that we just experienced.  In the identification scheme inside of EDO, that shock doesn’t really represent a shock to potential output, so that, in EDO’s inflation dynamics, the falloff in output that’s driven by that shock is putting downward pressure on inflation.  There are other shocks in the model that are not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing an explanation about different shocks in DSGE models, particularly in EDO, and how they affect inflation dynamics and output.


Passage number 64.
 MR. LACKER.  What other shocks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot be determined without further context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 65.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, there are various shocks in EDO, such as preference shocks, as there would be in any DSGE model.  You might say that those are shocks to demand, for example, and those would shift the concept of potential output such that they would tend to minimize the gap.  But the biggest thing going on in EDO, the shock that is causing the gap to open up and to be very wide, is, again, this economywide risk premium shock.  In other words, the way EDO tells the story is that a very big increase in slack has opened up, and that is putting downward pressure on inflation.  A different DSGE model might parse the data very differently:  It might say that, indeed, a lot of what we might think of as a falloff in demand in this cycle is having an effect on a flexible-price concept of output, or something like that.  I guess the point I want to make is that the identification assumptions used in DSGE models, and one’s interpretation of what they would imply for inflation, can yield very different results when you do variations on those identification assumptions.  This is something that a number of people have commented on. If you ask whether a DSGE model would tell the story differently from, let’s say, FRB/US, the answer is “maybe—it depends on the DSGE model.”  So EDO’s telling of the tale in a lot of ways is not that different from FRB/US, but another DSGE model, like, say, the Smets–Wouters model, would tell the story very differently.  This is a cautionary tale about our ability, as far as econometrics goes, to identify exactly what is driving things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker discusses different shocks and interpretations of data in relation to DSGE models, highlighting how different assumptions and models can produce different results and interpretations. This suggests that there is disagreement and uncertainty in the field of econometrics when it comes to identifying the exact drivers of economic phenomena.


Passage number 66.
 MR. LACKER.  I understand the difference in the results you get from different models, but at a previous meeting you explained to us that you had EDO, a self-contained, general equilibrium model, and then outside of EDO you estimate a statistical trend to capture potential.  So when you tell the story told by EDO, you’re talking about the story told by the combination of EDO and your ad hoc statistical trend for potential.  Am I right about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and expressing understanding of the model and its components.


Passage number 67.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  No.  I think that, when Mike Kiley was doing the briefing, he pointed out that, in some sense, there are three different concepts of “trend”—let’s call it that—in EDO.  One is a smooth statistical filter, a Beveridge–Nelson type of thing.  Another is a production type of concept, and that would be closer to what’s in FRB/US.  A third is a flexible-price type of concept, which would be more like what’s in a lot of other DSGE models. Let me come at this issue another way.  We can ask:  What shocks should monetary policy try to offset, and what shocks should it not try to offset, in the sense that policy can’t do anything about them from a social welfare viewpoint.  The answer is:  It depends on the nature of the shock.  Even the economy-wide risk premium shock is an issue.  For example, if you thought in late 2008 that the shock represented households that suddenly really hated risk a lot more than they used to, then a policymaker might say, “Well, welfare is such that, if a whole set of household behaviors is changing, then it might be optimal to let that happen.  Monetary policy shouldn’t offset it.”  But if, instead, you thought households suddenly felt that the world was a lot riskier than it used to be, then monetary policy might want to offset that, particularly if doing so changes the risk distribution. Where I’m going—and, incidentally, I’m being pushed in my abilities, because I’m not the best person to talk about this—is back to the issue of the nature of these models.  I’m referring both to DSGE models and to models like FRB/US, which is more elaborate.  The nature of these DSGE models is that there’s a set of identification assumptions used in them from which people will draw welfare implications.  I think you could say that it’s really pushing the ability of those models in their identification assumptions to say, “Oh, I can draw welfare conclusions from that to say what shocks monetary policy should try to offset and what shocks it should not.”  I think that’s taking it right to the limit.  Now, there are definitely different views on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly presents different concepts of "trend" in economic models and discusses the nature of these models and their ability to draw welfare implications. While there may be different views on this topic, the passage itself does not express any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 68.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Should that make us more or less comfortable with the view that is produced in FRB/US.  If it’s that hard to identify these things, the same problems occur in a different context with FRB/US, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Plosser, discussing the difficulties in identifying certain things in the context of FRB/US.


Passage number 69.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Oh, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 70.
 MR. PLOSSER.  So you can’t really distinguish between these two based on this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply stating that it is not possible to differentiate between two things based on a certain point.


Passage number 71.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Ultimately, I think it’s hard to say when economics would ever be at the point that it could actually make welfare judgments that you could really trust.  But there’s another way of looking at it:  Suppose the Committee is focused on one side of its mandate and asks, “What level of the unemployment rate or of GDP would be consistent with price stability.”  Eventually the answer comes out to be something that you just learn about over time, and, as you learn about it, you revise your views about what potential output or what the labor market slack would have to be.  That’s something you just have to observe, react to, and then adjust policy accordingly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 72.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you.  I’m glad we cleared that up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses gratitude for resolving a previous issue, indicating agreement or clarification.


Passage number 73.
  [Laughter] MR. STOCKTON.  That was somewhere between an answer and a filibuster, and I’m not sure which.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a light-hearted comment about the previous response being lengthy or evasive.


Passage number 74.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of the word "laughter" indicates a light-hearted or humorous tone, rather than conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 75.
 MR. EVANS.  Whenever we talk about structural unemployment—I realize that there are different definitions that probably are relevant to this—it seems to me that it’s inevitably about the limits of monetary policy.  There are at least a couple of different views that one could take.  One is that you might think that monetary policy is not capable of improving the unemployment rate at any time, in other words, unconditionally that is not really appropriate for monetary policy.  If that’s your viewpoint, this discussion really is not very important at all, because these issues never come up.  Or you could take the view that unemployment is amenable to changes in monetary policy.  I take that view.  And you could worry about ineffectual attempts to reduce the unemployment rate through monetary policy, that is, the case where monetary policy gets to the point where it can’t reduce the unemployment rate without somehow spurring more inflation.  I would say that’s a very important issue, and that’s how I interpret these analyses.  If there’s another perspective, I’m not quite sure what that perspective would be, and I’d enjoy some discussion of it. My best assessment of these excellent and very broad analyses is that the contributions of mismatch are relatively small compared with the 9.4 percent unemployment rate, which would imply that there’s still room for monetary policy.  Another point that seems to come out of this, if I understood it correctly, is that mismatch is relatively transitory.  We brought this issue up as a potential obstacle to effective monetary policy actions, and if it were something that is permanent or at least persistent, that would be troubling.  But it seems that, as the unemployment rate begins to go down, it’s likely that this mismatch is going to decline, too, so the structural unemployment rate will go down.  Following that course, I don’t think it would have substantial inflationary effects if we were quite accommodative for quite some time.  If mismatch is higher, then we should expect to see inflation higher.  That’s a test for us, and we could respond appropriately. In terms of the analysis, I do have one question, and I’d enjoy hearing your perspectives on it.  I noted that there was not a lot about dispersion in wage growth.  There’s structural unemployment, and then there are wages, and the questions are how wages might respond and what role monetary policy could have in that.  If mismatch were a big deal—with some industries doing poorly, and other industries doing well but struggling to find qualified workers—I might have thought that would show up in wage growth dispersion and that there’d be some sectors where things are pretty strong, so we’d see big differences in wage growth across industries.  But my staff showed me data that says dispersion is lower than normal.  Do you have any thoughts or comments about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing his own views and requesting others' perspectives on the topic of structural unemployment and monetary policy.


Passage number 76.
 MS. ŞAHIN.  First of all, I agree with your summary; we were actually surprised to uncover this cyclical component of mismatch.  Even if the level of mismatch stays constant, when the economy goes through high levels of separations and the unemployed pool gets bigger, this effect gets amplified.  So, as the unemployment rate starts going down, this effect will go down. In terms of wages, I haven’t done any work on that, but the San Francisco Fed’s memo written by Mary Daly, Rob Valletta, and Bart Hobijn actually looks at exactly what you said.  They looked at the employment cost index and average hourly earnings series for different industries, and they tried to link this to quit behavior.  So the question is:  Do we see industries that are trying to hire and not managing to do so, and in industries where quit rates are different, do we see anything on wages.  They found that there are broad-based movements in wages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing additional information and agreeing with a previous summary.


Passage number 77.
 MR. FABERMAN.  I would like to add to that, going back to some of the points I discussed—and let me note that this is another thing on which we don’t have very good research at this point.  Movements in the real wage are also going to affect the response of people collecting UI benefits, as well as how intensively firms go about filling their vacancies.  If firms feel the real wage is too high relative to what they’re looking for, that’s obviously going to affect how selective they are in whom they hire.  If workers collecting UI benefits view the real wage as too low, they may keep rejecting offers until they find a wage that’s acceptable.  So mismatch dispersion measures aren’t necessarily the only way to think about how wages are going to be affecting some of the things we’re looking at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement discussing the potential effects of movements in the real wage on the response of people collecting UI benefits and the hiring practices of firms.


Passage number 78.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. This is because "President Kocherlakota" is just a name being mentioned, without any context or additional information to indicate a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 79.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank the authors for their papers, and I want to thank Ayşegül, Jason, and Bruce, in particular, for their thoughtful discussion.  I learned a lot from all of the papers.  I think what affected my thinking the most was the treatment of the house-lock effect.  Before I read these papers, I would have said that was something to be really concerned about, but I came away convinced that it is probably relatively unimportant. I’m going to say a few words—actually, maybe more than a few.  I’m always asked, “What’s the biggest surprise since you took over this job.”  I don’t give the true answer, but I’ll give it now, knowing that it will not be revealed to anybody, because it’s FOMC-protected, for five years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is acknowledging and appreciating the papers and discussions, and sharing their own personal thoughts and experiences.


Passage number 80.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  Unless it’s in the minutes, Narayana.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a transcript of Mr. Tarullo speaking and there is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions being expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 81.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think this is not going to make the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage as Mr. Kocherlakota disagrees with the idea that the discussion will be included in the minutes.


Passage number 82.
 MR. TARULLO.  It depends on what you say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 83.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no content or disagreement in the given phrase "President Bullard" as it simply states a position or title.


Passage number 84.
  MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thought this was very nice work and a very nice presentation—I really enjoyed it and found it a pleasure to read.  I’m going to make a couple of comments, and I think they’re going to dovetail with the previous discussion here. I’d say that the takeaway from these ten memos is that the research on this question, as good as it is, is not yet able to provide a satisfactory answer.  I’m going to suggest that, to make progress, we have to move away from the partial equilibrium analysis emphasized here and toward more general equilibrium analysis with monetary policy explicitly included.  I’m going to give you a rundown of what I think that means and what I have in mind, because there is literature on this. The question is:  Should we analyze the labor market by itself or in the context of a fully articulated macroeconomic model with monetary policy included.  I think the answer is that you’ve got to have the fully articulated model in order to get the answer to the question that we face around this table, namely:  How much impact can monetary policy have on unemployment. Work in this direction does exist, although it was not stressed in these memos, so I am going to stress it here.  The literature began in the 1990s with papers by David Andolfatto in the American Economic Review, and Monika Merz in the Journal of Monetary Economics.  They used a very basic idea, namely, to take Diamond–Mortensen–Pissarides labor search theory and merge it into otherwise standard business cycle models.  If you go through all the pain of doing that, the model will produce a business cycle, but then there will be frictional search-theoretic unemployment, which will also fluctuate in response to shocks to the economy.  The unemployment in that model is an equilibrium unemployment rate, and it is bouncing around all the time as the economy gets hit by shocks.  But there are no other frictions in those models, and there’s no monetary policy at all.  I would say that those papers were moderately successful and surely pointed the way for future research—these authors were writing before the modern era of New Keynesian macroeconomics really got started. Since the publication of those articles, there have been a lot of contributions, in particular, the sticky-price New Keynesian macro models associated with Mike Woodford and others.  Therefore, the natural question would be, if you took that kind of a monetary policy model, but with no unemployment, could you put Diamond–Mortensen–Pissarides into it and get a sensible answer to these kinds of questions.  The answer, actually, is “yes,” and it has been done.  One example I know of is Mark Gertler, Luca Sala, and Antonella Trigari recently in the Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking.  What do they do.  They take the same kind of exercise as in Andolfatto and Merz, but they put it in Woodford’s model of monetary policy.  In this model, then, there’s labor search-theoretic unemployment, and the level of unemployment is going to be fluctuating in response to shocks to this economy, so you might very naturally call this the natural rate of unemployment or the equilibrium rate of unemployment.  But in this model, because of sticky prices, the unemployment rate that you actually observe will not be equal to this frictionless or search-theoretic unemployment rate.  And, because there is a gap between those two unemployment rates, it is going to be the natural variable of focus for monetary policy.  It is what you would be trying to determine, and it is what you would be trying to reduce in the model. Gertler, Sala, and Trigari actually do calculate this, and, for those of you who have stayed with me this far and are interested, you can check their figure 7, which actually plots it pre-crisis, which is when they wrote the paper.  You could calculate it post-crisis—it’s an exact analogue of the New Keynesian output gap.  I think this is the most promising way to think about this issue.  Of course, these calculations are complicated; furthermore, I think we heard Dave Reifschneider saying earlier that he doesn’t really trust these models yet, which is very sensible.  But, at the same time, conceptually, this is definitely the way to go.  We’ve got to get busy and work on this and go forward.  I think it is important to pursue this line of research and try to make further progress in this area. What is the bottom line intuition.  I think it works this way:  The economy is hit by a large shock, which generates a lot of unemployment, but that would happen whether prices were sticky or flexible.  So the relevant variable for monetary policy would be the difference between the sticky-price and the flexible-price levels of unemployment.  This difference is likely to be small, so I would look at the high level of unemployment as not being very informative for monetary policy at this point.  Also, there would be a great deal of uncertainty about the size of this gap.  If we do further research, we might be able to pin this down better—we might be able to reduce that uncertainty, and we might be able to change the intuition, because maybe the intuition is wrong.  That’s what research is for, and the assessment remains to be seen.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It appears to be a discussion in which Mr. Bullard compliments the work presented and makes suggestions for further research and progress.


Passage number 85.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans, do you have a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a polite and straightforward request for a comment from President Evans.


Passage number 86.
 MR. EVANS.  I wanted to pick up on something very interesting that President Kocherlakota raised and that ties in to some commentary that President Fisher has made before.  Narayana started off by talking about whether or not something is invariant to a monetary policy intervention.  As I have understood President Fisher’s comments, businesspeople are very concerned about new regulations, health care reform, and so on, in part because they don’t know exactly how much that is going to cost.  I have heard this from them myself.  These higher labor costs induce them to change their production processes, in part to go towards a higher-skilled and higher-wage worker.  That’s part of a capital–labor choice, and it depends on relative prices. My thought is that something that is perhaps not invariant to monetary policy is wages.  There’s a lot of resource slack out there, a lot of people unemployed.  And if wages were lower, that would be an offset to these business costs, right.  I tried to engage my directors on this point at our last meeting.  I acknowledged the commentary about higher business costs and asked what if real wages were 20 percent lower—I purposely chose an outlandish number.  Interestingly, they just refused to engage in that discussion.  Instead, in their commentary, they talked about demand effects, saying that they really are not comfortable that the demand is going to be there.  So I think that unemployment that is attributable to firms’ concerns about higher business costs is potentially amenable to monetary policy, in the sense that a hike in prices in an environment of sticky wages could lower real wages.  I agree completely the question is:  What is invariant to policy.  And I think that if you think about this more carefully, there are a lot of things that can be affected by policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different viewpoints and ideas but there is no direct disagreement or argument.


Passage number 87.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only mentions President Kocherlakota without providing any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 88.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I agree with this wholly, that is, that rationing shows up in the labor market because the real wage is too high to hire more people.  Indeed, I have this same conversation you described having with your directors, and the response is, “Wages.  Wages don’t matter.  What matters is the quality of human being we’re hiring.”  To be honest, I think they think this because they have a nominal wage set in their heads for a particular job, and that’s it, that’s the end of the story.  The tenor of my remarks is not to say, nor do I believe I have ever said, that sticky nominal wages are not part of the issue.  I think that that is captured in our ability to adjust the real interest rate.  If we can get it down far enough, then basically the real wage will adjust to clear labor markets as well.  We have one instrument—with large-scale asset purchases added on, et cetera.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker agrees with the idea that rationing shows up in the labor market due to high real wages and acknowledges the importance of wages in hiring decisions. The speaker also discusses the role of nominal wages and the ability to adjust the real interest rate. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 89.
 MR. EVANS.  My own view is that we’ve been in a liquidity trap, and we’re stuck at this interest rate, so higher inflation is one aspect that would lead to a solution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own view or belief about being in a liquidity trap and how higher inflation could potentially be a solution.


Passage number 90.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m sympathetic to that—you and I agree on the concepts.  The question is the quantities, and, unfortunately, those are hard to come by, and I suspect it will remain hard to do so even if I looked at the Gertler, Sala, and Trigari paper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers express agreement on the concepts being discussed but acknowledge the difficulty in obtaining precise quantities. Mr. Kocherlakota states that even if he were to read a particular paper, it is likely that getting accurate quantities would still be challenging.


Passage number 91.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, did you have a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking President Fisher if they have a comment on something, without expressing any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 92.
 MR. FISHER.  I have asked the same question.  I think the answer is that employers find lower-wage workers outside the domestic workforce.  So that’s the release valve.  Nobody wants to say, “Well, you know, I’m willing to pay someone a substantial fraction of what we paid them before.”  It’s socially unacceptable, and it’s not necessary, because they have options.  This is what globalization is all about.  So I think it is effected by looking to other workforces.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and stating a possible explanation for employers finding lower-wage workers outside the domestic workforce.


Passage number 93.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This question cannot be answered without the specific passage being provided.


Passage number 94.
  MR. FISHER.  Maybe it’s not the world we want, but that’s the world that we live in.  Whether you like the social philosophy or not is not the issue.  It’s a question, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me, of another source of friction, but you have pointed out that this is just one source of friction.  If you are trying to allocate capital, it affects the capital allocation decision.  That’s the simple point that I’ve been trying to make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and making a point, but there is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 95.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, you have identified a concept economists have talked about called efficiency wages, which is that people’s effort may depend on the wage they receive, so cutting wages may not be a good strategy.  Anyone else have a question or comment. I’d just like to say a few words—and I’m going to regret this.  [Laughter]  What President Bullard, as well as, I believe, President Kocherlakota and President Lacker, described was a much more complicated machine with all of the pieces—that includes monetary policy, it includes the real side, it includes labor supply, and so on—which recognizes that if there’s a big shock, then everything is going to move to some extent, including what we would think of as the natural rate of unemployment.  But I think that, even though the terminology is different, the concepts are not unrelated.  In particular, the point that you’re making is that what FRB/US calls U* depends on lots of things, and it can move around.  And these studies were trying the best they could to get an empirical grip on how much it has moved.  Knowing how much it has moved is important, because, as Charlie was saying, it helps us estimate how much space we have in terms of monetary policy expansion, what the unemployment rate will likely be five or ten years from now, and what the determinants of inflation and other things will be.  But, as you point out, there are a lot of factors affecting U*, so all the presenters can say is that they have tried to identify some of the important ones and tried to give quantitative estimates of how big they are.  But, clearly, as in all of the problems we face, everything is moving, and that makes it more complicated, certainly.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the complexity of the concept being discussed but agrees with the point being made by the previous speaker.


Passage number 96.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I certainly agree with everything that you said, Mr. Chairman.  When I hear people talk about this, there’s a distinction between structural things, that is, things that are moving more long term, and cyclical things, that is, things that are moving at a cyclical frequency, or medium term, shall we say.  I think some of the things that happen at a cyclical frequency are not so amenable to monetary policy, and they pose challenges for us to correct using our main instrument, which has been the real interest rate, so I’m not sure that’s the right distinction. In the discussion today, the story was, “Well, mismatch is small, so that means there is clearly room for monetary policy to be accommodative.”  That step in logic is not clear to me, because many other factors can move U* around.  Let me note that I absolutely don’t want to undercut the value of the work that was presented:  The papers were very good, and I learned a lot from them.  It’s just that there are lots of other factors, that’s all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker begins by agreeing with the Chairman, then expresses some uncertainty and discusses a different perspective on the issue. However, the speaker clarifies that they do not want to undermine the value of the work presented. Overall, the passage does not demonstrate any contentious or disagreeing tone.


Passage number 97.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 98.
 MR. LACKER.  I agree, as well, with everything you said and with what President Kocherlakota said.  Just to cast this in a different light, let me note two things.  First, the exclusion of cyclical from a definition of “structural” is to some sense a priori.  And what we’ve learned from the models we’ve developed and explored and done a lot of research on since the 1970s is that that’s a poor assumption and that there are a lot of models in which that just isn’t true.  I think that is part of the fault line here.  Second, I would point out the distribution of estimates of how much room we have.  We’re at 9½ percent unemployment, and we have estimates that we’re anywhere from 4¼ percentage points to 0.6 percentage point away from our mandate-consistent unemployment rate.  There’s a substantial difference in the sense of the urgency one would attach to conducting policy in a way to reduce unemployment.  So it’s consequential for policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with what others have said and offering additional perspective.


Passage number 99.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You can also define “structural” and “cyclical” in a statistical sense.  Whatever model you can write down, unemployment in the real world tends to come back to more or less the same level after a business cycle is over.  There’s a very sharp pattern of rise and slow decline back to a normal level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an observation about unemployment returning to a normal level after a business cycle, without any conflicting views or contradictory statements.


Passage number 100.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  But there’s nothing in a statistical approach that connects that, without any other assumptions, to what we can do with policy.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that directly contradict or disagree with each other. It simply states that a statistical approach does not automatically connect to policy without additional assumptions.


Passage number 101.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, there are the relationships with that to inflation, for example.  Any other comments.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply mentions that there are relationships between something (unspecified) and inflation, without providing further details or expressing any disagreement.


Passage number 102.
 MS. ŞAHIN.  I would like to make a quick comment about the DSGE models with search frictions.  In my opinion, they have two major shortcomings.  The first one is that generally they assume complete markets, and, in a model where we assume complete markets, policies like unemployment insurance are completely irrelevant, so we can’t really understand their effects.  The other shortcoming is that generally workers are homogeneous, which makes it harder to study issues like mismatch.  These were the two main reasons that we wrote the papers as we did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MS. ŞAHIN is stating her own opinion and is not in direct disagreement with anyone.


Passage number 103.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 104.
 MR. FABERMAN.  I just wanted to add to that.  I agree that moving towards models that incorporate search frictions into a New Keynesian or any other type of DSGE model is a great way to go.  But there is one note of caution about search models in general—regardless of whether they’re embedded into an RBC [real business cycle] model or some kind of New Keynesian model—that I’d like to bring to the Committee’s attention.  People who write down theories of labor market search incessantly fight each other about how the wage is determined in the bargaining between workers and firms.  Dozens of models have different ways to do it, and those ways vary quite a bit in the flexibility of that wage in the aggregate.  Some are completely flexible, such as the standard Mortensen–Pissarides type models.  Other models, such as those in work by Rob Shimer and Bob Hall, incorporate wage rigidities, both in a nominal sense where the price is actually sticky, and in what the workers’ outside options are relative to what they’re being offered. My main point is that, in terms of thinking about policy and the real interest rate and what’s going with the real wage, in these models, the definition of the real wage is very muddy.  I don’t know how much simpler it’s going to make your life to use them, because, while they helped introduce search frictions and some heterogeneity and new ways to think about the labor market, they also add new complications precisely in the wage, the one thing you want to think about the most with monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing different models and viewpoints, noting that there are varying opinions and approaches when it comes to determining wages in labor market search models. It does not present a clear argument against any specific viewpoint.


Passage number 105.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  If the Senate had had the good sense to confirm Peter Diamond, we could have wrapped this up in 10 minutes.  [Laughter]  All right, I understand that coffee is ready, so let’s take 20 minutes for a break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a humorous remark about the Senate's decision and then suggests taking a break.


Passage number 106.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  For the next item on our agenda, let me turn to Brian Sack for an update on financial conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the next item on the agenda is an update on financial conditions.


Passage number 107.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Brian.  Are there questions.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. President Plosser is simply confirming that he is available to answer questions.


Passage number 108.
  MR. PLOSSER.  Brian, you mentioned changes to the Supplementary Financing Program, and you said it was now something like $200 billion.  Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is just a clarification question by Mr. Plosser to confirm the accuracy of Brian's statement about the Supplementary Financing Program.


Passage number 109.
 MR. SACK.  Right.  The current balance is $200 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 110.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Is that reflected in the balance sheet scenarios that you work out later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement suggested in this passage. It is a straightforward question about whether a certain idea is reflected in the balance sheet scenarios.


Passage number 111.
 MR. SACK.  In the income projections.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states that Mr. Sack is talking about income projections, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 112.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’m referring to income and size of the balance sheet going forward, and I ask because that will raise the size of our balance sheet by $200 billion, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a question posed by Mr. Plosser about the potential increase in the size of the balance sheet.


Passage number 113.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It raises only the reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something raises only the reserves.


Passage number 114.
 MR. ENGLISH.  It doesn’t change the size of our balance sheet.  It changes the composition of our liabilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the balance sheet without any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 115.
 MR. SACK.  It would have a modest effect on the funding cost of the portfolio, because that balance would reduce the amount of reserves in the system by that amount.  We assume it does run down.  And does it return.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker is stating a hypothetical scenario and making an assumption about its outcome.


Passage number 116.
 MS. REMACHE.  It returns.  It declines to zero at the time that the portfolio resumes its steady-state growth.  So it stays at $200 billion throughout the projection, and then is run off as reserves return to $25 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes a sequence of events without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 117.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The provided passage does not contain any statements that indicate disagreement or contention. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 118.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. If the passage were provided, I could analyze it and provide a clear answer.


Passage number 119.
  MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, regarding the Treasury purchases, you noted in the memo that we had, ex ante, understood that we would be breaching the old 35 percent rule of thumb, and in certain issues you found that we might be as high as 70 or 75 percent.  My question is:  Are those higher percents clustered in a certain place along the Treasury curve, or are they randomly around the areas that we’re buying.  I ask, because there would be greater concern if they were all around a particular term that would be of interest to investors, for example, if they were all seven or eight years, whereas, if we were making the market but doing so with issues spread more broadly over the curve, it would be less worrisome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked for clarification.


Passage number 120.
 MR. SACK.  First of all, the concentration of our holdings isn’t quite as high as you suggested.  Our highest holdings right now are at 60 percent, and, under the new thresholds that the Desk published, we will only move up in 1 percent increments per operation, so that will slow how quickly we move up.  We have two issues at 60 percent and two others that are above 50 percent.  If we look at our top ten holdings in terms of concentration, all of them are old bonds except one, so, certainly, that’s the group for which this is relevant.  The maturities of those holdings range from 2015 to 2020, so it’s mostly in that 5- to 10-year sector.  But it’s not overly concentrated in any particular year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply providing information about the concentration and maturities of their holdings. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 121.
 MR. FISHER.  Excuse me, Brian, can you explain “old bonds”.  Is it in terms of price gains over book value.  Or does “old” mean that we bought them some time ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply seeking clarification and asking for an explanation.


Passage number 122.
 MR. SACK.  “Old” means “issued a long time ago,” so that they’re carrying a high coupon.  They tend to be less liquid and less desirable to market participants, which makes them appear cheap in our relative value analysis, so the method we use inclines us to purchase those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the meaning of "old" in terms of bond issuance and describes how these bonds may be perceived as cheap in relative value analysis.


Passage number 123.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In essence, we’re buying the bonds that people don’t want, as opposed to buying the bonds that they really want to hold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the type of bonds that are being purchased.


Passage number 124.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, did you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking President Fisher if they have a question.


Passage number 125.
 MR. FISHER.  Actually, I have a statement, Mr. Chairman, because I want to thank Brian and Bill English for pulling together that memo.  I don’t know how many people read it thoroughly.  It’s a subject I have been pestering you about for a long time, and I know it has been an annoyance.  But I learned a great deal from it, in addition to the exhibit you just presented.  It does condition our deliberations; for example, if we decided to have more rapid asset sales combined with an adverse interest rate scenario, it might result in nonremittances to the Treasury for quite an extended period.  So I want to thank you and your staffs for putting this together.  I think it’s a very important memo. The other point I would make is that it’s the kind of memo I wish we had had before we entered into the program, in that it would have informed our decisionmaking.  Sensitivity analysis is so critical in understanding the consequences of what you do.  And when you commit to buy $1.25 trillion worth of any asset, it is helpful to have this kind of analysis in place.  I gather you have had to build this from the ground up, almost from CUSIP up.  It’s great work, and, at least from this corner of the table, much appreciated.  I’m sure it is by everybody, and I want to thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 126.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, I know we have had memos like this before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges that memos like the one being referred to have been received before.


Passage number 127.
 MR. FISHER.  Brian and I have talked a great deal.  This is a very complicated piece of work—there are so many moving parts—and I don’t recall, at least in my six years, something this thorough.  But, of course, the programs have changed, the way we conduct monetary policy has changed.  Even though we have had work like this before, I still think this group deserves a big pat on the back, because this was a very difficult exercise.  I don’t know how many hours you spent on this.  I’m trying to impart a compliment, Mr. Chairman.  I think Brian needs compliments every now and then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is expressing his admiration and appreciation for a group's work, specifically praising their thoroughness and acknowledging the complexity of the task. He also acknowledges that there have been similar efforts in the past but still believes this particular group deserves recognition for their difficulties.


Passage number 128.
 MR. SACK.  I’ll take it.  [Laughter]  Of course, we presented an analysis of the risks on several occasions along the way, but it is true that we now have the machinery in place to do a much more comprehensive analysis of a wider range of scenarios.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This can be determined by the absence of any contradictory statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 129.
 MR. FISHER.  Good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply addresses someone as "Mr. Fisher" in a polite manner, which does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The Vice Chairman has a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is stating a fact, rather than expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 131.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a quick question:  How should you think about the asset sales piece, because that’s different from the interest rate path.  The interest rate path, presumably, reflects the pursuit of our dual mandate and the financial markets’ reactions to the economic environment.  The asset sales piece is, in some ways, discretionary—we could do it or not do it, and we could do it quickly or do it slowly.  How do you think about that when you’re doing this analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a question seeking clarification on how to approach the analysis of asset sales compared to the interest rate path.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
 MR. SACK.  First of all, if we believe that the balance sheet has had effects on financial conditions, then the primary consideration for you in how to manage the balance sheet and whether to sell assets would be the effects on financial conditions and the economy.  In terms of income effects, selling assets can concentrate returns.  It’s possible that, say, long rates would move up, but they do so because of greater optimism about the economy and an expected higher path of short-term interest rates.  In that sense, the higher rates, or the capital losses that would be realized by selling assets, are essentially just the present value of the future costs that the portfolio would face.  So, to a large extent, the asset sales are just reallocating the timing of when losses are realized, which is probably another reason not to make that income stream the primary objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is presenting the idea that selling assets can concentrate returns and that higher rates or capital losses are essentially just the present value of future costs. This view may be in contrast to another perspective that prioritizes maintaining the current income stream as the primary objective.


Passage number 133.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It is not completely invariant to the losses you realize, because there’s a term premium that you earn if you hold it until maturity and that you don’t earn if you sell the asset early.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is stating a fact about an investment, mentioning that there is a term premium earned if the asset is held until maturity and not earned if it is sold early.


Passage number 134.
 MR. SACK.  That’s exactly right.  You are giving up a term premium, and you can see that in the projections.  In fact, we did a scenario, which wasn’t reported in the memo, where there were no asset sales, and the total effect on income over ten years was on the order of $100 to $125 billion.  So there’s a sense that because of a term premium we’re earning an excess return.  And if we sell assets and shrink that, we’re giving up some expected income.  In addition, we’re affecting the timing of when it’s realized.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the consequences of selling assets and how it affects expected income and timing.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 136.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under the worst-case scenario, the high sales/high interest rate, you have a deferred credit asset accruing.  First, is there precedent for that.  And, second, has that been discussed with Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states a question being asked by Mr. Lockhart. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 137.
 MR. SACK.  That was an official accounting change, and, in effect, that deferred credit essentially allows us to use future SOMA earnings to offset losses today.  There is no precedent in the U.S., because it’s a new treatment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting a statement about an accounting change and explaining its effects. There is no disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or information about the content of the passage itself.


Passage number 139.
 MR. LACKER.  It’s exactly analogous to a deferred tax asset in U.S. corporate accounting, I believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is making a statement without any opposing viewpoints or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 140.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 141.
  MR. WARSH.  As I understand it, the losses that could ultimately generate this deferred asset would be losses that eat through the income and are the realized losses on the assets that are actually sold.  This doesn’t account for imputed losses on assets comparable with those that were sold, if they were somehow marked to market at that point.  The question that comes out of this is:  Do you think markets would, if we are in that sale mode, look through the assets that are not marked to market and query whether or not there are higher embedded losses that they should look through in order to evaluate the capital adequacy, to the extent that it matters, of the Fed’s balance sheet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage is discussing possible losses and the question of whether markets would consider these losses when evaluating the capital adequacy of the Fed's balance sheet. There is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 142.
 MR. SACK.  Let me note a couple of points.  First, we do report the market value of the portfolio on a quarterly basis, so the amount of unrealized gains or losses would be apparent to the market and, indeed, is already apparent to the market, regardless of what sales regime we’re in.  Second, I think it’s very important for markets to understand the message that these income streams and these losses, whether realized or unrealized, have no operational consequences for the conduct of monetary policy.  They don’t compromise our ability to tighten financial conditions or do whatever other operations we need to.  If that message is understood, it’s not clear to me that this results in any significant credibility problem for the Federal Reserve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a couple of points without disputing or contradicting any previous statements.


Passage number 143.
 MR. LACKER.  I’d just like to qualify that point.  Given the current magnitudes, that’s true as a practical matter, but it’s not a universal principle.  For example, we could run out of the ability to reduce reserves and reduce the base if our asset values fell.  So, in theory, it could impede our ability to withdraw stimulus, but, at the current magnitudes, we’re pretty far away from that, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is simply clarifying a point and mentioning a hypothetical scenario where the ability to withdraw stimulus could be impeded. However, he acknowledges that this is not currently the case.


Passage number 144.
 MR. SACK.  Yes, that’s exactly correct.  I was ignoring that for the purposes of simplifying the discussion.  It affects the value of our collateral that we can use to drain reserves through reverse repurchase operations.  But the value of the collateral would have to fall dramatically, given that we have more than $700 billion of currency out there.  Also, of course, we can drain without collateral by using the Term Deposit Facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing additional information and clarifying a statement made earlier.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The given information only mentions President Plosser without providing any context or details that would indicate a disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 146.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’d like to restate my question about the SFP a little more precisely.  When SFP goes away, we transfer out of the Treasury, and they become excess reserves, in effect.  Right.  We’ve just entered a program where we’re going to blow excess reserves up by $600 billion, and the transfer I just mentioned is going to increase excess reserves by another $200 billion in the process.  I was trying to get at the notion that, in part, that’s an effect on income, because now we’re actually paying income out on the excess reserves that these are converted to, which reduces our net income. The policy question is:  How does that affect our ability to drain reserves when the time comes, given that reserves are going to be $200 billion higher because of this action.  This action may end up affecting what we face in terms of the pace of asset sales or our ability to drain using reverse repos and other things.  In other words, the end of SFP could make the draining problem bigger than it otherwise would have been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is expressing concern about the potential consequences of the end of the SFP (System Open Market Account - Supplementary Financing Program) on the ability to drain excess reserves and the pace of asset sales. He suggests that these actions may make the "draining problem bigger than it otherwise would have been." This implies disagreement or potential disagreement with the policy decision to end the SFP.


Passage number 147.
 MR. SACK.  You’re right about the income effects, but, given the level of short-term interest rates, that’s trivial today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the income effects are trivial given the level of short-term interest rates.


Passage number 148.
 MR. PLOSSER.  But as interest rates go up on interest on reserves, we’re going to be paying more and more out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 149.
 MR. SACK.  That’s correct.  And in terms of affecting our draining, if the SFP balance goes down to $5 billion, then $195 billion of reserves will enter the system for that reason between early February and early April.  If the SFP balance were not taken back up at some point, then that would increase draining needs by that amount.  I will note that the Treasury intends to emphasize the flexibility with this program in its statement.  The last time the debt ceiling became binding, the program was taken down to $5 billion, but then, once the debt ceiling was raised, it was brought back up.  I don’t think we want to prejudge what’s going to happen, because it will depend importantly on how the debt ceiling is raised, but the Treasury is at least retaining that flexibility and could bring the program back up in size.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about the potential effects of reducing the SFP balance and the Treasury's intentions regarding the program. There is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 150.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Governor Duke" without providing any information or context to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 151.
 MS. DUKE.  I’m just curious about the market’s perception that we’d be more likely to sell Treasuries than the MBS.  It seems to me that the last time we talked about this we talked entirely about selling the MBS.  Maybe that was because we had proportionately more of them at the time, but we kept talking about getting back to an all-Treasury portfolio.  So the market’s perception seems a little odd to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Duke is simply expressing her curiosity about the market's perception and sharing her thoughts on the topic.


Passage number 152.
 MR. SACK.  That was, for me, one of the more surprising aspects of the survey results, and, unfortunately, we didn’t ask any questions that would allow us to understand that result better.  In some of the written comments, though, a few members noted that Treasuries were easier to sell and would be less disruptive to the market, so, for at least a couple of respondents, that seemed to be the reasoning.  But we could explore that in more detail, and I agree with you that it was surprising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing surprise at the results of a survey and agreeing with the other person's viewpoint.


Passage number 153.
 MS. DUKE.  My question is partly why, but the other part is whether, at some point, there is anything we should do about that.  In other words, whenever we start talking about exit, should we be talking more about getting back to all Treasuries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It mentions a question and presents two parts of that question, indicating a neutral stance.


Passage number 154.
 MR. SACK.  Well, in general, I think it’s appropriate.  If and as the Committee moves towards a well-defined strategy, that could be communicated at some point to allow markets to prepare and adjust.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing a personal opinion and there is no indication of disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the title of "President Kocherlakota" without providing any context or information that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 156.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll say one thing about the remittances.  I think it’s important not to view this purely as an operational issue or purely as a communication issue with markets.  I think we can all agree that it’s going to be solved.  However, I think the challenge is communication with the broader public.  We’re going through a high revenue period right now, and it’s often advertised as, “Boy, the Fed is doing great.”  The flip side of that is if remittances fall to $5 billion, then stories are going to be written about the Fed saying that it’s facing challenges, that it has been running irresponsibly, and so on.  I’m not saying that this challenge should influence policy, but it should influence communication. My second point is also about communication.  It strikes me that, when we ask questions of the dealers, we, in some sense, tip our hand a bit about what the realm of policy choices might be.  I admit that I don’t know how to get around this.  We do want to have information from markets, but asking the questions of markets is also transmitting information.  I’ll put this issue on the table as something that perhaps we can talk about when we get to the discussion of the work of the subcommittee on communications that we’re going to have later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing two separate points: the first is about the challenge of communicating the issue of remittances to the broader public, and the second is about the potential information transmission when asking questions of the dealers. The speaker does not express disagreement with anyone else's viewpoints or present contradictory ideas.


Passage number 157.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me comment on both issues.  On the first issue, you’re right, there are going to be communication challenges.  In most scenarios, the projections strictly dominate our non-quantitative easing income stream.  Even in these worst-case scenarios, though, over a five-year average, we’re still doing about the same.  So I think we can manage that, except in the most extreme scenarios. On the second issue, Brian and some of his staff raised the question of whether we would want to release publicly the questionnaire that we give to the dealers.  The idea would be to do it before the meeting—at the same time that we circulate it to the dealers—which has the advantage of putting everybody on the same footing.  My own thought was that we should wait and see, partly because I was concerned that circulating it would just create more speculation.  It seemed to me the better thing, if that really was becoming a problem, would be just to stop circulating the questionnaire at all.  You have identified a problem that Brian and his staff have looked at, and it may be something we need to discuss as a Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker commenting on two different issues and sharing their own thoughts and concerns.


Passage number 158.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, both extremes seem unsatisfactory.  I don’t know in my own head where I stand on this, but I think it is something we should try to solve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement expressing uncertainty and a willingness to find a solution.


Passage number 159.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we agree to think about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is merely suggesting that the speaker and the listener should consider something together.


Passage number 160.
 MR. SACK.  Can I just say a word.  We believe that the survey does not reveal information to the respondents, and we try to be very careful to construct it so that it does not.  But public release is still an issue, in that doing it would eliminate any perception of asymmetric information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. Mr. Sack is simply stating their belief regarding the survey and expressing a concern about public release of the information.


Passage number 161.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  If it’s truly not revealing information, then I guess it would be okay to release it publicly.  We can talk more about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kocherlakota simply expresses his willingness to discuss the possibility of publicly releasing information.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else.  Any further questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of simple statements and a mention of President Lacker without any conflicting opinions or ideas being expressed.


Passage number 163.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question for you, Brian, has to do with a couple of things related to the difference between the path that our asset purchases induced for the asset side of our portfolio and the path that reserves and the monetary base have taken.  The discrepancy has been pretty large in the last couple of months.  For example, in December we bought a lot of assets, but reserves went up just $2 billion and the Treasury general account went up a ton.  Then, in January, we had AIG repaying the New York Fed—as an aside, I’d like to congratulate the New York Fed on the repayment of the AIG credit—which is almost a $50 billion reserve drain.  Then, in February and March, with the Treasury running off the SFP, it’s going to add $200 billion.  Then, it wasn’t clear from your documentation what the Treasury is planning with the TGA. I have a granular question:  What’s the Treasury thinking about the TGA.  They used to peg it at $5 billion back when we sterilized stuff.  It’s sort of a pain.  At the magnitude of our balance sheet, this is, perhaps, not likely to be material, but it’s bordering on a material effect on our reserve position.  When we get to the point where we’re running off reserves, maybe a couple of years from now, we could get into situations where the management of the TGA makes a material difference in what happens to reserve balances.  So I’m wondering how we should think operationally, in the Committee’s deliberations, and whether the Treasury is giving you any more color about its intentions for the TGA and whether it’s worthwhile to try to influence Treasury to provide us with a little more surety about its TGA strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question and seeking clarification about the Treasury's plans for the Treasury General Account (TGA).


Passage number 164.
 MR. SACK.  Let me say a few things about what’s been going on with the TGA and then say a couple of things about what I think it means for policy implementation.  You’re right that the TGA has been unusually large and very variable—it has been swinging between $10 billion and $100 billion, which is very different from the old regime, where it was very steady at a low level, like $5 billion.  The reason is that the Treasury used to use its accounts in the private sector, the TT&L and TIO accounts, to absorb those fluctuations in its cash balance because it could get a higher return.  That return is tied to short-term interest rates.  With short-term interest rates having moved to near zero, and given that those programs have some operational costs, they’ve taken those programs down to a very trivial level, and they’re just letting the cash balances in our account fluctuate. In terms of policy implications, we don’t regard that as a problem, given our current directive, which is to manage reserve conditions consistent with a funds rate from zero to 25 basis point.  We have so many reserves in the system it doesn’t matter much if they’re fluctuating by $100 billion because of this factor.  But, as we move into a regime where it becomes more important to manage reserves more precisely—for example, that might be the case when short-term interest rates begin to rise—then we’ll have to come to a solution.  Of course, if short-term interest rates are rising, it will be very natural for Treasury to start to move funds back to the banks, and we’ll see a return towards the old regime, but, depending on the exact timing and the exact directive we’re given, we could come back to this issue with Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the changes in the TGA and discussing potential policy implications.


Passage number 165.
 MR. LACKER.  Part of my question was motivated by the discussions we had in December 2008 and January 2009 about the fact that in the past the SOMA had a one-for-one relationship with reserve conditions and the funds rate, and yet we were embarking in early 2009 on programs that would break that relationship.  I thought we agreed to take a cohesive approach within the Committee, even though, as a governance matter, there were separabilities in the governance of some of those things.  We sit around here and talk about adding $600 billion to assets under the assumption that it’s going to add $600 billion to reserves, and it turns out that, under some scenarios, reserves are going to go up $800 billion because of the debt limit.  So there’s a bit of a disconnect in focusing on just the asset side, and that’s what I was suggesting that we could be thinking about going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily expressing the speaker's thoughts and concerns about the relationship between the SOMA (System Open Market Account), reserve conditions, and funds rate.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, if we determine that it was creating problems or distorting our policy, we certainly could talk about sterilizing some of the differences.  Certainly we’re technically able to deal with that.  Any other questions.  [No response]  If there are no further questions, then we need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by the speaker suggesting that if certain differences are causing problems or distorting policy, they could discuss sterilizing those differences. The passage ends with the speaker asking if there are any further questions and then calling for a vote to ratify domestic open market operations.


Passage number 167.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Ms. Yellen is simply stating that she has been moved by something, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any objections.  [No response.]  Thank you.  The next item is the economic situation.  I’ll call on Dave Reifschneider to lead off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks if there are any objections and receives no response. They then proceed to move on to the next topic, the economic situation.


Passage number 169.
 MS. ZICKLER.4  Thank you.  I’ll be referring to the “Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants’ Economic Projections.” In broad terms, as shown in the top panel of exhibit 1, you are expecting a sustained recovery in real economic activity over the next three years, marked by a noticeable step-up in the rate of increase in real GDP this year followed by further gradual acceleration during 2012 and 2013.  Although you anticipate that the decline in the unemployment rate—the second panel—will remain relatively modest in the coming year, you project a more noticeable tilt down in joblessness as the expansion strengthens.  Regarding inflation—the bottom two panels—the central tendency of your projections shows total PCE inflation relatively stable over the next three years.  However, your projections show a gradual uptrend in core inflation over the period. Exhibit 2 provides more detailed summary statistics for your projections and compares them with those that you made in November and with the staff Tealbook forecast.  Starting with the change in your near-term projection since November, as shown in the first two lines, you have marked up your expectations for the increase in real GDP this year, with the central tendency now nearly 3½ to 4 percent.  Many of you indicated that the stronger-than-expected data on production and spending that we have accumulated since November, along with the passage of the fiscal package, led you to view the recovery as having gained some strength that should carry through 2011.  A number of those who did not change their forecasts significantly noted that the recent news had led them to shift their assessment of the balance of risks surrounding their forecasts from weighted to the downside to broadly balanced.  That said, the recent news did not alter significantly the central tendencies of your expectations for the pace of real activity in 2012 and 2013, which call for real GDP to increase between 3½ and 4½ percent in 2012 and between 3¾ percent and 4½ percent in 2013.  This general pattern of revisions is also reflected in the updates to the Tealbook forecast since November. Your projections suggest that real GDP will increase at above-trend rates over the next three years, supported by accommodative monetary policy and improving credit and financial market conditions.  A number of you noted that fiscal policy should provide some temporary stimulus this year but should be a drag in 2012.  Your narratives indicated that many of you believe that the ongoing expansion will be led by sustained increases in consumer and business spending, and a number of you suggested that improvements in household and business confidence and in labor market conditions should help to reinforce the rise in private demand.  Nonetheless, many of you commented that, while the recovery appears be on a firmer footing, the headwinds from the limited improvement in the labor market, lingering household and business uncertainty, and problems associated with the weak housing and nonresidential real estate markets are likely continue to exert some drag on economic activity over the forecast period.  4 The materials used by Ms. Zickler are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). Your projections for the unemployment rate—the second set of statistics—trace a steady downward path over the next three years that is quite similar to the projections that you submitted in November.  The central tendency of your forecasts calls for a decline from about 9¾ percent at the end of 2010 to 8¾ to 9 percent at the end of this year and then to 6¾ to 7¼ percent at the end of 2013.  The staff Tealbook forecast, which is also little changed since November, falls in the middle of your central tendencies. Turning to inflation—the bottom two sets of statistics—you can see that the central tendencies of your projections for total and core PCE inflation are similar to those you provided in November.  The same is true for the Tealbook, which continues to forecast inflation at the low end of your central tendencies.  As I noted earlier, your projections suggest an uptrend in core inflation over the 2011-13 period.  Nonetheless, more than half of you expect that total PCE inflation in 2013 will remain below your estimates of its longer-run rate.  Some of you noted that the persistence of a wide margin of slack in resource markets would help keep inflation relatively low over the forecast horizon.  And a number of you indicated that appropriate monetary policy, combined with well-anchored inflation expectations, would help keep inflation in check. Your longer-run projections—detailed in the column at the right—continue to anticipate that, over time, the annual rate of increase in real GDP will converge to 2½ to 2¾ percent, with an unemployment rate of 5 to 6 percent and total PCE inflation between 1½ and 2 percent.  Most of you indicated that this would most likely occur within five or six years, although a number of you noted that the decline in the unemployment rate could lag the convergence of the rate of increase in real GDP and inflation to their longer-run rates.  Moreover, the central tendency for your projections of the unemployment rate in the longer-run remains relatively wide—a result that is likely consistent with the range of views on structural unemployment expressed earlier. Regarding your monetary policy assumptions, half of you—a somewhat larger proportion than in November—conditioned your outlook on a less accommodative stance of monetary policy than assumed by the staff.  Specifically, those respondents indicated that they thought that the appropriate policy would involve an earlier start to normalizing the balance sheet than assumed in the Tealbook, an earlier increase in the federal funds rate, or both. Your final exhibit summarizes your assessments of the uncertainty and the risks that you attach to your projections.  As indicated in the two panels on the left-hand side of the page, most of you continue to judge that the uncertainty attached to your projections for both real GDP and inflation—as well as for the unemployment rate (not shown)—is greater than the level of uncertainty that prevailed on average over the past 20 years.  This judgment was attributed to uncertainty related to the nature of recoveries from financial crises, the effects of unconventional monetary policies, structural dislocations in the labor market, the sustainability of fiscal policy, and the global economic outlook. Although your level of uncertainty was little changed from the November SEP, you now view the risks to your forecasts—summarized in the panels to the right—as noticeably more balanced than in November.  In particular, almost all of the participants who previously saw downside risks to their projected increases in real GDP now view them as balanced, and several of you now see upside risks to your forecasts.  The most frequently mentioned upside risk to GDP growth was the possibility that the recent strengthening of private demand marked the beginning of a more normal cyclical rebound in economic activity.  To the downside, a number of you cited the recent declines in house prices and the problems in real estate markets, which could have greater-than-expected adverse effects on consumers and on credit availability, and the possibility of more serious spillovers from fiscal austerity and sovereign debt problems in Europe. On inflation, the shift in the distribution was similar to that for real GDP, with several of you moving your assessment from risks weighted to the downside to balanced risks and with one additional participant now judging inflation risks to be to the upside.  Several of you cited large resource gaps and the possibility of a slower-than-expected economic expansion as downside risks.  However, a number of you commented that you saw the likelihood of deflation or further unwanted disinflation as having lessened.  Some of you noted that highly accommodative monetary policy posed an upside risk to inflation, and several saw another upside risk in the possibility that prices of energy and other commodities would continue to increase faster than anticipated.  This concludes my prepared remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Brian Sack, you had a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards Brian Sack for his comment.


Passage number 171.
 MR. SACK.  I have a very brief one.  I want to correct a figure that I cited in my answer to Vice Chairman Dudley.  I had said that an alternative scenario without asset sales could raise cumulative portfolio income by $100 billion to $125 billion.  Unfortunately I was looking at the wrong column.  The effect relative to the baseline was actually $50 billion.  So the point is right that asset sales can reduce cumulative expected income, but I overstated the magnitude.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that they made a mistake in citing a figure and clarifies the correct information.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for our colleagues.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple expression of gratitude and a request for any additional questions. It does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 173.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question for Nellie—it’s not a fair question [laughter], so just try, if you could, to do your best to answer.  The middle right panels on exhibit 5 and on exhibit 12 deal with European exposure.  One of the things we learned in the crisis is that it’s not the first degree of separation, it’s the second—that is, it’s your exposure to the people that have the exposure to risky entities.  Steve commented that the Greek sovereign debt situation is probably unsustainable, which suggests that it’s moving toward some form of restructuring or default that may be managed or unmanaged, and it may trigger a lot of concern about other countries’ debt.  Do we have any sense of our system’s exposure to the people who have the exposure and the risk that could come from a contagion getting started.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 174.
 MS. LIANG.  In the table in exhibit 12, the middle right, the data are from the BIS consolidated banking statistics, and they are an approximation of the U.S. banking system’s exposures to debt in these countries.  As the table indicates, it’s estimated to be $67 billion to Greece, Portugal, Ireland, and another $52 billion to Spain.  Those are small amounts, but the exposures to France and Germany can be large—some of their large banks are big counterparties in transactions that we have.  I don’t know if we have strong supervisory data, but we have these data, which are not exactly the same.  If you give me a minute, I can get that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the data in a table and acknowledging that it may not be the exact same as the supervisory data.


Passage number 175.
 MR. KAMIN.  Nellie, can I make a few remarks while you’re looking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kamin simply asks if he can make a few remarks while someone is looking.


Passage number 176.
 MS. LIANG.  Please go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is clear and does not involve any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 177.
 MR. KAMIN.  We do believe that the Greek sovereign debt is unsustainable, but a couple of points are worth making.  First of all, there is some chance that the European Union will decide to bail out Greece completely so that they do not have to default or restructure their debts.  I don’t know what the chance of that is, but that is certainly in the probability space.  Second, we don’t place that high a likelihood on a full EU bailout for Greece, and instead we place a much higher likelihood on Greece’s undergoing some kind of restructuring.  It is our working assumption for our forecast, and it is also our hope, that this process occurs a bit down the road, when investors will have had a good opportunity to “ring-fence” Greece away from the other countries.  That is, investors understand that Greece’s situation is unsustainable, and when the restructuring occurs, they won’t be surprised, they’ll be ready for it.  If that, indeed, occurs, then, not only is our exposure to Greece close to de minimis, but the exposure of the other large Western European banks to Greece is not so great either.  Basically, as long as you can keep the investor sentiment stabilized, the direct exposures to Greece are probably small and can be maintained.  The problem that we had back in May was that we were in an atmosphere of very great uncertainty, where nobody had ever seen an industrial economy close to default.  In that atmosphere, expectations ran rampant, and all types of global financial markets were highly destabilized.  It’s our assumption that that will not occur if Greece has a restructuring, let’s say, a year or two down the road.  But, obviously, that’s a hope, not a certainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage discusses differing opinions on the likelihood of a full EU bailout for Greece versus a restructuring of their debts. The speaker believes that a restructuring is more likely, while acknowledging that there is a possibility of a bailout.


Passage number 178.
 MS. LIANG.  President Lockhart, I don’t have the BIS data on the U.S. exposures to the core Europeans through the banking systems.  These data are going to be updated, and we’re expecting to have a new set next week.  We can pass that along, and, as you might guess, there are significant exposures to, say, Germany and France, because they’re big countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the speaker, Ms. Liang, does not currently have the BIS data on U.S. exposures to core Europeans through banking systems. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 179.
 MR. LOCKHART.  As I said, I realize it wasn’t a fair question, but I was trying to get a sense of what the real risk might be.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Lockhart acknowledges that the question he posed might not have been fair, implying there is no disagreement. He then expresses gratitude, indicating a positive and cooperative tone.


Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context about a vice chairman or any possible contention or disagreement related to the vice chairman. Thus, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 181.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions on fiscal policy.  First, in exhibit 3, I was a little surprised to see the state and local government showing a positive fiscal impulse this year.  It didn’t track all the articles I’ve been reading about big imbalances and layoffs, so I’d just like to understand what the source of that is. My second question is on the payroll tax holiday at the federal level.  How do you see that working through the economy in terms of the data.  Are people going to smooth that out, or could it show up in the first quarter as an outsized effect, since this is going to be concentrated there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking two questions for clarification and seeking understanding. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 182.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Let me answer the second question first.  For the payroll tax, we do think there will be smoothing.  We’re thinking it will bump up growth in consumer spending starting in the first quarter.  But our view is that only about 30 to 40 percent of the reduced payroll taxes will show up in increased consumption in 2011, and some more will show up in 2012; consumers will be spreading the spending out over time.  People with much lower incomes will probably spend it right away, but a lot of people are not super constrained in terms of liquidity, and, in our view, they’re likely to spend it more slowly.  That lessens the degree to which spending gets pushed up in 2011 and then falls off a cliff in 2012.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering their own view and discussing the potential impact of reduced payroll taxes on consumer spending.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 183.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I was worried that it might be hard to read the numbers over the next couple of months, because if you get strong consumption, you’re not going to be sure if that’s just a temporary factor or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents uncertainty or a potential disagreement about the interpretation of future numbers related to consumption. The concern is whether strong consumption is a temporary or lasting factor and suggests a lack of consensus or clarity on how to interpret the data.


Passage number 184.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes, that’s definitely true, and even three years from now it will be hard to read the numbers and tell what happened, although we’ll do our best.  That will be a bit of a question mark as we go through 2011 and into 2012 as well. Now let me answer your first question.  In the bottom left panel of exhibit 3, that’s state and local net of their spending out of grants; so, if you calculated their total spending and included the federal grant effect, that would be a slight negative, not a positive.  But when you read the news accounts, and you see the trouble that Illinois and California and many states are in, it’s natural to wonder how this could be.  Part of the answer is to look back at what they did just this last year—while local governments were cutting their payrolls, the states themselves, interestingly enough, actually increased their payrolls a little bit, despite all of the pressures they’ve been under.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents information and provides explanations without conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 185.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And the pressures could come from the spending side.  They could be spending on pensions and health care.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply suggesting that the pressures could arise from spending on pensions and healthcare.


Passage number 186.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  That’s true.  But they’re going to be under a lot of pressure, so they’re not going to be increasing their spending by any large amount, and, indeed, spending growth is going to be close to zero this year.  So states are by no means any significant contributor to the nation’s growth in this forecast. I think the positive fiscal impulse comes back to the room created by higher tax receipts—we do think tax receipts have been growing and that they’ll continue to grow at about the rate of GDP, which, of course, is not super fast.  As I understand it, in the mid-session reviews, states’ budget situations are coming in somewhat better in a lot of cases than was expected, and, in general, it’s not coming in worse than expected, although, to the extent that some of them kick the can down the road, it may be as bad as they expected.  Given that, we think that will enable those states to avoid massive cutting in real spending on purchases and things like that, but that is a risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing his analysis and interpretation of the data without presenting any conflicting views or contradicting statements.


Passage number 187.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo, did you have a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states that someone is asking Governor Tarullo if he has a comment. It does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 188.
 MR. TARULLO.  I just wanted to add a couple of things to what Nellie said in response to President Lockhart.  When we get the BIS numbers, there are three things to keep in mind.  One, our experience has been that the BIS numbers tend to overstate actual exposures just because of the way they count and what they characterize as an in-country exposure as opposed to an exposure to a foreign subsidiary of your own country’s companies. Two, since May we’ve been tracking this pretty carefully through the LISCC, and it’s pretty clear that our large institutions have been reducing exposures not only directly to the periphery, but also to those who hold a lot of periphery debt.  How much.  That’s a little harder to get our arms around, but the trend has been clear.  In contrast, as Nellie pointed out, the money market funds don’t have a penny less exposure to Europe today than they did a year ago—they’ve just reallocated which countries the exposure is in. Three, if you look at credit default swaps for the large European banks, the big French and German banks have not seen that much of a run-up in their CDS spreads.  One assumes that that’s in no small part because of an assumption that the French and German governments would back those banks were they to take a significant hit from Spanish, Portuguese, Irish, and Greek banks, which is probably a reasonably well-grounded assumption. So, for all of those reasons, it’s really hard to come up with numbers, and most of us who have been puzzling over this for the last six or eight months are left with a sense that it’s a pretty big potential exposure if things really go south, but it has been getting somewhat smaller over that same period of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing additional information and clarifying certain points mentioned previously. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 189.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thanks, Dan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude by Mr. Lockhart.


Passage number 190.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 191.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to follow up on this line of questioning from President Lockhart and Governor Tarullo.  It’s a question we’ve been puzzling over in Minneapolis.  It seems that if you look at the sovereign debt in Europe, the situation looks just as bad today as it did in April and May in terms of the spreads.  And yet there doesn’t seem to be any evidence of the contagion that alarmed us so much in May—I think the VIX popped over 40 at some point.  So that contagion story that was such a factor in our discussion in May doesn’t seem to be there now.  I’m looking for stories to explain it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their observation and asking for an explanation.


Passage number 192.
 MR. KAMIN.  Shall I start and you follow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kamin is simply asking for permission to start and suggesting that the other person will follow.


Passage number 193.
 MS. LIANG.  I’ll start this one.  Just to corroborate Steve’s remarks, in April, May, and June, when the European CDS did start rising, the correlation with U.S. asset prices was enormous.  The second time around, it just wasn’t visible at all.  In large part, it has to do with some of the facilities that were set up in Europe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a comparison between two different time periods and their correlation between European CDS and U.S. asset prices. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 194.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, I think that’s the major element.  When this erupted in May, it was very novel, as I mentioned before.  We hadn’t really had the experience of an industrial economy coming close to default—though, of course, we had had many instances with emerging market economies—and there were no institutions in play to address the problem.  There was tremendous uncertainty about how far European authorities would go to put money on the table to backstop these economies.  So in that situation of tremendous uncertainty, you had dislocation throughout global markets.  Since then they’ve responded in a number of ways that have given investors heart. For example, they bailed out Greece in a somewhat ad hoc manner, and then they followed that up with actual institutions, such as the European Financial Stabilization Mechanism and the European Financial Stability Facility, which were established to backstop further sovereign runs.  They were used in the case of Ireland, and in fact, they came to Ireland’s rescue somewhat more readily than to Greece’s. More recently, recognizing that they still don’t have enough money in the kitty, they’ve been actively discussing enlarging it.  Ideally, that would have gone through this month, but in fact, it was postponed to a European summit in March.  In addition, it’s now recognized that the stress tests of banks that were done last summer probably were not severe enough, and they’re undergoing another round of tests.  All of these things together are giving investors some confidence that the situation is getting dealt with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing a description of events and actions taken in response to the financial crisis in Europe.


Passage number 195.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a polite expression of gratitude directed at Governor Raskin.


Passage number 196.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This question is for Nellie, and it refers to the real estate piece on exhibit 11.  You said that the estimated losses from potential mortgage put-backs ranged from $25 billion to $75 billion and that they could be material for a few firms.  You then indicated that this estimate reflected a markdown in light of notable settlements with Fannie and Freddie.  My question is whether the markdown took into account future probable put-backs.  In other words, did you look at the full universe of what those put-backs could be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a question being asked for clarification.


Passage number 197.
 MS. LIANG.  The estimate I cited comes from work by Mike Alix and staff at the New York Fed, so it was done in a pretty comprehensive way.  They literally looked at the private-label securities that these firms had.  They had the loan portfolio of mortgages originated.  They had the firm-specific default rate for each bank.  They estimated how much of that might be attributed to deficiencies in the process, and then the strength of the securities.  On the basis of that, they then took estimates of the GSE put-backs—the recent claims give you some idea.  And then they had to assess how much the private-label investors would be able to claim.  So that’s why there’s a range, because they had to make some assumptions about how high those claims could be.  These current assumptions are that the private-label investors would not be more successful in putting back than the GSEs, which have a pretty sophisticated system.  To sum up, the estimate is based on the full portfolio of originations, firm-specific default rates, and firm-specific put-back assumptions.  So I think it does incorporate the full view.  The $25 to $75 billion is a pretty broad range, though, because it’s hard to know how successful they’ll be in court, which is really the probability you have to write down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the methodology and assumptions behind the estimate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 198.
 MS. RASKIN.  But leaving the private-label stuff aside, did you take into account the full range of GSE put-backs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: In the passage, there is a mention of leaving the private-label stuff aside, suggesting that there might be a disagreement or contention about whether or not to consider the full range of GSE put-backs.


Passage number 199.
 MS. LIANG.  Yes, I think we have the estimates of the outstanding GSE put-back claims, plus an estimate of claims to come.  I think that’s all in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Liang is stating a fact about the estimates of the outstanding GSE put-back claims and claims to come.


Passage number 200.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing gratitude with the phrase "Thank you."


Passage number 201.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 202.
 MR. FISHER.  I’d like to ask a question about exhibit 7, the bottom right-hand corner, and, in particular, about commodity prices.  First, it’s uncanny that both lines moved straight to the right.  Also, I’m curious to know what your nonfuel index is based on.  You may have mentioned it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is raising a question and expressing curiosity about the lines in the exhibit and the basis for the nonfuel index, suggesting a potential disagreement or doubt about the accuracy or reliability of the information.


Passage number 203.
 MR. KAMIN.  No, I didn’t.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kamin simply states that he did not do something without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 204.
 MR. FISHER.  Okay.  Would you kindly mention it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provided does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward request for information.


Passage number 205.
 MR. KAMIN.  It’s based on a combination of indexes of different types of nonfuel commodity prices that are published by the IMF, I believe.  We take them with the IMF weights and we reconfigure them to match the weights that are based on United States imports.  Once we have those weights, we re-weight each group, and the groups are beverages, other food, metals, and agricultural materials.  We then get futures curves for some of the different commodities in each of those groups to create projections of these commodity prices for each group, and then, using the weights, we come up with the aggregate projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 206.
 MR. FISHER.  So it’s more model-based and it uses futures curves to the extent we have them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining that the approach being discussed is more model-based and reliant on futures curves.


Passage number 207.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, it’s much more futures-based than it is model-based.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that something is "much more futures-based than it is model-based." There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement presented.


Passage number 208.
 MR. FISHER.  And we know the record of futures curves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. It is a statement about the record of futures curves without any indication of conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 209.
 MR. KAMIN.  Right, exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that Mr. Kamin agrees with the previous statement or idea mentioned.


Passage number 210.
 MR. FISHER.  I point that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Fisher is making a point.


Passage number 211.
 MR. KAMIN.  It is exactly based on futures curves, which are highly fallible and yet not apparently more fallible than humans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that futures curves are fallible, but not necessarily more fallible than humans.


Passage number 212.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  Very good.  I have just a couple of points.  First, for certain key industrial commodities, such as iron ore and so on, I wouldn’t underestimate the impact of the Australian floods.  The backup in shipping and the short-term price pressures that seem to be emerging on that front are extraordinary.  Second, I still wonder about the substitution effects; maybe this could be the subject of another conversation.  I’m not talking about physical demand, which, one would assume, will grow over time as the economies improve and as China moves up the food chain, and so on.  I’m talking more about demand that’s financially driven.  For example, if I put on my old hat as an investor, right now I’d be looking for greater returns on my portfolio.  Of course, the U.S. stock market has done brilliantly, but, with my surplus liquidity, I’d be tempted to look to, say, Brazil or Russia with at least a portion of my portfolio.  As these countries erect more capital barriers—and the Brazilians have been a bit active here—a perfect substitute for Brazil, if you plot the two markets together, is the copper market, and there’s no carrying cost of copper futures.  A perfect substitute for the Russian market is the oil futures market.  My point is that I didn’t notice any discussion of how much of the trade is financially driven and how much of it is physically driven, and I think that’s something we need to contemplate.  I don’t want an answer right now, but I think it’s something we need to continue to think about in terms of driving prices upward and becoming a vicious circle. Third, I just want to say a word, for what it’s worth, about Chinese inflation.  What I’m hearing from my contacts is that, for retailers who sell nonfood goods in the United States and source in China, the demands are now 40 percent.  It’s a combination of labor inflation running about 15 percent per year as computed in their five-year plan, and transportation and other costs.  The U.S. retailers hope to whittle it down to 8 to 10 percent through negotiation.  According to one CEO of a major retailer, who at one point ran the largest retailer, this is the worst inflation he’s seen in 25 years, and it’s sourcing out of China and alternative markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is sharing their own points and observations without contradicting or challenging any previous statements.


Passage number 213.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, that’s very interesting.  I would just mention that, first of all, we are quite focused and eager to put more resources into looking at the effects from within China, such as wage pressures, on the prices of the goods we import from them.  Second, we have been doing and will continue to do a great deal of work trying to parse out the relative factors pushing up commodity prices.  We are very attuned to the role of futures market and financial demands in that regard, and we’ll continue to do work on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kamin is simply stating his own perspective and the actions that his team is taking.


Passage number 214.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Fisher is expressing gratitude for something, which suggests a lack of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 215.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response]  If not, I understand that there are drinks available followed by dinner, and there will be no business, just for your convenience.  Tomorrow let’s start at 9:00 a.m. sharp with the economic go-round.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information and expressing gratitude.


Passage number 216.
 [Meeting recessed] January 26—Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning.  Why don’t we get right to work and begin our economic go-round.  President Lockhart is up first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The meeting is starting with President Lockhart presenting the economic go-round.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 217.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The improved tenor of the incoming data has been clearly reflected in the comments coming from business contacts in the Sixth District in this intermeeting cycle.  The best characterization of those comments is more optimistic than before the December meeting but still a bit tentative, cautious, and reluctant to place significant bets on stronger demand.  As the data show, the pace of consumer spending has clearly picked up, but our conversations with retailers, some of which have national scope, convey little sense that they are preparing for a stronger year in 2011.  I draw this conclusion from our queries about inventory, store expansion, and hiring.  The inventory of unsold homes continues to weigh on residential real estate markets in the Southeast.  Reports from our survey of Realtors are consistent with the current Tealbook’s forecast of a modest drop in house prices.  The data also indicate that business investment in equipment and software remains buoyant.  Our contacts in the region tell us the lion’s share of this investment is oriented to further productivity enhancement and streamlining of supply chains and distribution systems, not a response to an improving economy.  Our directors and contacts pretty uniformly stated the view that gains in labor productivity have not been exhausted and will continue to take priority over hiring. Regarding labor market conditions and prospects for hiring, our most recent round of discussions with business leaders in our District evoked some widely held views that may be relevant to yesterday’s discussion of the NAIRU.  We heard a lot of comments to the effect that job descriptions have been, and continue to be, transformed to require broader skills, modern technology savvy, and generally a higher degree of versatility and flexibility, even in positions that are relatively low on the totem pole.  We heard such comments about truck and car sales personnel, truck drivers, and agricultural workers, to mention a few.  The CEO of a large auto retailer described the extension of the salesperson’s job into financing arrangements, warranty negotiation, and documentation.  This seems to be occurring across a spectrum of industries and occupational lines.  The message we heard is that the new employee is not so easy to find and that many of the unemployed lacked the skills and the attitude to fill these redefined jobs. Turning to my forecast, with some comparison to the Tealbook, my economic growth forecast has been revised up a little, but not materially.  In reality, my forecast for growth, unemployment, and inflation are really not much changed from my November submission.  I continue to hold the view that headwinds from a variety of sources will restrain growth to a pace a little under 3½ percent this year, keep unemployment elevated, and allow for only a modest rise in core inflation. My forecast for inflation is slightly higher than the Tealbook’s, and, as I mentioned, my forecast for GDP growth is slightly lower.  On balance, I don’t think the differences in the near-term outlook between what I submitted for this meeting and what I read in the Tealbook are all that significant.  While I have not incorporated the recent rise in commodity prices into my inflation outlook, for largely the same reasons delineated in the Tealbook, my recent conversations with business contacts have introduced more caution into it.  These conversations reflect a growing sense that attempts to pass through higher commodity prices to the consumer are about to be implemented across a range of products.  I heard that price hikes in apparel, transportation and delivery services, household goods and hardware, and grocery products are in the works.  There is much uncertainty whether these price increases will stick, but this is the first indication I’ve heard that businesses believe they have pricing power.  Influenced by this anecdotal feedback, I have changed my assessment of the inflation risk from weighted to the downside to balanced.  I also think the specter of deflation is less likely today than it seemed last fall, in part due to the effect of our policies.  Regarding economic growth and employment, I still see the risks as broadly balanced.  However, if pushed to express a bias one way or the other, I am now tilting in the direction of the upside.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the comments about business contacts and their outlook on the economy. While the improved tenor of incoming data suggests a more optimistic outlook, there is still a sense of caution and reluctance among business contacts to place significant bets on stronger demand. This suggests a disagreement or difference in opinions about the potential strength of the economy.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Rosengren.


Passage number 219.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Over the intermeeting period, the tenor of the incoming data has improved.  Most private forecasters have been raising their estimates of the last quarter of 2010 and the first quarter of 2011.  Like the Tealbook, I am expecting growth over 2011 to be between 3½ and 4 percent, somewhat above the most recent Blue Chip forecast.  While the consumption and investment data have generally improved, continued problems in housing and state and local government spending should prevent the economy from growing much faster than 4 percent this year. The problems with residential investment cause me particular concern.  Boston staff has done some research that suggests that spillover effects from a weaker housing market are a significant risk and found that the magnitude of the risk was qualitatively very similar to the scenario in the Tealbook that involved an intensified real estate slump with spillover. Even with somewhat more robust growth, it is likely to be at least four years before we reach full employment.  While we have discussed issues with structural employment at length, I would highlight that both directors and members of my various councils have highlighted how easy it is to hire qualified workers.  And I would note that the New England labor market is much tighter than most other parts of the country, because only in Rhode Island is the unemployment rate above the national average.  I will give just one example.  A retail grocer in New England is planning on expanding by opening four additional grocery stores and needed to hire 500 workers.  He had more than 4,000 applications for the jobs, with lines extending well around multiple city blocks.  And he was struck by how many had previous experience running bakeries, butcher shops, other grocery stores, or had other skills particularly relevant to the grocery business.  Contacts expanding in high-tech, restaurants, and financial services have similar stories and have remarked on how many highly qualified candidates are available.  The problem remains too few jobs, not too few skilled workers. Given the excess capacity in labor markets and the downward trend in both core inflation and compensation, returning to a 2 percent core inflation rate in the medium term will certainly require years of much stronger data than we have seen to date.  We still see evidence of this in the inflation data:  Despite the increase in energy prices, many key areas have experienced price declines over the past year, including motor vehicles, household appliances, and apparel.  The low inflation rate and the likelihood that it will remain below our target over the medium term gives us ample room to encourage faster improvement in labor markets and to put the economy on a stronger footing. I would like to compliment the staff on the material they are providing in the financial stability report.  I also remain concerned that the European problems pose downside risks to the United States.  At the last meeting, I highlighted the risk that money market fund exposures to Europe could be a channel of transmission from Europe to the U.S. financial markets.  Some of the smaller money market funds over the past year have had exposure to peripheral sovereign debt, and, when worrying about the financial stability of money market funds, it is the smallest, rather than the largest, that tend to pose the greatest risk of breaking the buck and initiating another broad run. A second transmission channel I have not focused on in my earlier comments consists of European banks in peripheral countries.  The pictures in the financial stability packet show how much the CDS spreads have widened for Spanish banks, as more attention has been given to sovereign debt problems in Spain.  Banco Santander, one of the largest banks in the world, has had its CDS rise from 83 basis points at the beginning of 2010 to 292 basis points more recently.  The CDS on the other large Spanish bank, BBVA, has risen from 85 in the beginning of last year to 314 more recently.  Investor concerns about some of these large European banks highlight the urgency of getting our own economy on a solid footing, so that we can withstand any additional significant financial shocks in the coming year.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you. President Hoenig" only expresses gratitude towards President Hoenig and does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig, have you brought these issues to the supervisory group.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if President Hoenig has brought certain issues to the supervisory group.


Passage number 222.
 MR. HOENIG.  Yes.  In fact, our senior person in Kansas City is working with the folks here at the Board.  We’ve suggested that we need to be thinking about how we deal with these banks on a national basis in terms of the underwriting standards that go with this situation.  What happens, of course, is that, when the asset values go up, the bank’s loan-to-value numbers go up, and the bank feels very secure.  But when developments start going the other way, the bank gets caught below the line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only mentions Governor Duke without providing any information or context that could lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 224.
 MS. DUKE.  I’d like to add to that.  I’ve talked to a number of community bankers, and they tell me that a large proportion of these sales are for cash, so they’re not necessarily financing them.  What they’re afraid of is that the farmers are using their cash in the purchases today, and that, a couple of years from now, when they have worse years, they’ll be back to borrow against the cash that they invested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the perspective of MS. DUKE, who is relaying what she has heard from community bankers about the concerns they have regarding farmers using cash for their purchases.


Passage number 225.
 MR. HOENIG.  Right.  There are strong cash flows coming off their property right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are strong cash flows coming off a property.


Passage number 226.
 MS. DUKE.  It’s not the financing of the property.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about the financing of property.


Passage number 227.
 MR. HOENIG.  But there is a lot of financing of the land part.  There are also a lot of loan repayments, because the cash flows are so strong right now.  But that’s my point:  Things are so good that you can move the price up, and then you are only borrowing 50 percent to 70 percent against it and assuming that the value will go up further.  Of course, two or three years from now, you will get caught behind, and that’s the thing we’re worried about as we share this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is more of a statement explaining the current situation and expressing concern about potential future consequences.


Passage number 228.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But the particular emphasis ought to be on the exposure of the financial institutions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there should be a focus on exposing the financial institutions.


Passage number 229.
 MR. HOENIG.  Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "absolutely" is used here to emphasize agreement or certainty, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 230.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 231.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Many of my business contacts started off saying that things weren’t that much different from our last call.  As we talked further, it usually became clear that their attitudes continued to improve this month.  My inference is that their businesses are picking up in line with their rising expectations.  For example, manufacturers have been doing well recently and are saying they expect that to continue.  The Chicago purchasing managers’ survey rose sharply in December and picked up further in January to its highest level in more than 20 years—that result will be released January 31.  More firms appear to be expecting increases in demand and laying the groundwork to expand production when the time comes.  ArcelorMittal reported record sales to steel service centers who are building inventory in anticipation of demand, and this is coming on top of a good base of orders from automakers and other original equipment manufacturers. Many firms remain reluctant to make permanent additions to workforces.  However, the CEO of Manpower told me that many of their client firms have asked them to be ready to supply more temps in the next few months.  The clients are expecting a burst of demand, but they are uncertain about the timing, and, when it does materialize, they expect to have a hard time hiring workers quickly enough by themselves.  He also mentioned that a number of firms have openings that they are taking longer than usual to fill.  These companies feel that there are a lot of good people out there right now, and, with demand not fully recovered, they can afford to wait and make sure they get the best person.  This is probably consistent with the results that we saw yesterday on the drop in recruiting intensity. With regard to costs, although there is talk about higher commodity prices, few of the increases are being transmitted into higher prices for final goods and services at the moment.  Manufacturing CEOs that I spoke with suggested that their planning for these cost increases was still adequate to avoid outsized price increases.  They do devote considerable resources to managing these costs, and, at the moment, they think things are okay. U.S. steel manufacturers are trying to decide how much capacity to bring back online.  This is a difficult decision, given foreign competition.  Foreign orders today would hit the market in six to eight weeks, about the same length of time as domestic capacity would take to ramp up, so, if it came at the same time, that would be bad for prices, in their view.  Looking ahead, these forces are a potential dampening factor for currently high steel prices.  Pass-through is also an issue.  One of our financial contacts noted that hedge funds are shorting firms that are exposed to commodity price increases on the assumption that they lack the pricing power to pass these higher costs on to customers.  We’ll see. I see the anecdotes as being consistent with the incoming data, which show that activity is on a better upward trajectory right now.  I hope this momentum will build into more consistently solid growth than we saw in the first year and a half of the recovery.  We need it, because we’ve got a long way to go. The Board and Bank staff analyses on labor markets summarized yesterday have been helpful in honing my thinking about current resource gaps.  Undoubtedly, the baseline for unemployment has risen some, but there continues to be substantial slack in labor markets.  And if monetary policy can help ameliorate this unsatisfactorily slow decline in unemployment, that’s our policy job, in my judgment. Turning to the outlook, our forecast for economic growth and inflation and the rationales underlying them are broadly similar to the Tealbook’s.  With regard to growth, I’m more optimistic today than I was at our last meeting, but I need to see several more months of consistently better data—say, running through the spring—to be pretty confident that we’ve experienced the sustainable step-up in growth that’s in our forecast. With regard to inflation, our forecast has it rising some over time but still coming in under 1½ percent in 2013.  Our battery of statistical approaches to forecasting inflation continues to point primarily at further declines or, at most, flat inflation at a low level.  However, we decided to go with an inflation projection that rises somewhat over time on the basis of what appear to be inflation expectations that return towards a mandate-consistent level.  That’s what we need, but it still seems a touch speculative to me.  We’ll actually have to see underlying inflation move up in line with these forecasts in order to have confidence in these expectational effects.  In light of these forecasts, I see only a small risk that we’ll face an unpleasant conflict between our employment and inflation goals over the foreseeable future.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 232.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses thanks and acknowledges President Pianalto.


Passage number 233.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Plosser.


Passage number 234.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you, President Kocherlakota" is simply expressing gratitude towards President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota, I was a bit confused on one point.  Stock and Watson in their paper actually projected inflation, and they suggested there was significant deflation risk.  Did you get a different result.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and asking if President Kocherlakota obtained a different result than what Stock and Watson suggested in their paper regarding inflation and deflation risk.


Passage number 236.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think they’re going to turn out to be wrong on this point.  If you use the forecasting model that they talked about in Jackson Hole, they would have forecast significant disinflation from that point forward.  All I was saying is that, by the end of 2011, that model is not going to have those same pressures in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing his opinion that the forecasting model is incorrect, but there is no direct contention or disagreement with anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 237.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of simple affirmations and expressions of gratitude. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 238.
 MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the 12th District, holiday sales for retailers generally exceeded expectations.  My contacts also noted a shift in spending away from generic products towards more luxury items.  My staff has discouraged me from describing these luxury items in any detail after my comments on Spanx at our last meeting [laughter], so I won’t do that, but I will say that this shift towards these luxury items suggests a more secure, less cautious consumer. The outlook is gloomier for state and local government spending.  In California, total general fund spending has been cut by almost 20 percent over the past three years, and further cuts are on the way as the state struggles to balance revenues and spending.  Among other effects, these cuts have squeezed public resources directed to nonprofit organizations.  Our contacts in these organizations have stated that this is leading to widespread consolidations in an attempt to salvage some semblance of services. Turning to the national economy, recent data have generally been quite favorable.  Consumer spending and auto sales have picked up, business investment is rising, and exports are making a solid contribution to growth.  A downside risk to the outlook is the housing market, which the Tealbook describes as “moribund.”  One definition of moribund is “at the point of death.”  That might overstate the situation a bit [laughter], but it is certainly hard to detect much of a pulse in construction.  With 20 percent of current mortgages underwater and house prices still falling, there is no prospect of an imminent residential resurrection.  Continued house price declines could also lead to additional defaults and foreclosures, putting further pressures on bank balance sheets and credit availability. Still, the predominance of good news since our last meeting has led to a sizable upward revision to last quarter’s real GDP growth.  The greater momentum has also boosted our GDP growth forecast to 4 percent this year and 4½ percent next year.  However, fast growth for a couple of years is not enough, as unemployment is projected to remain stubbornly high.  Analysis by my staff that was detailed in the FRB San Francisco background paper described yesterday suggests that the bulk of the increase in unemployment reflects weak labor demand and not a rise in structural unemployment.  In the special Systemwide survey on hiring plans, the number one factor restraining hiring was low expected sales growth.  Currently we put the effective natural rate of unemployment somewhere around 6¼ percent, but almost all of the recent increase in the natural rate should be unwound over the next few years. A key indication of the significant slack in labor and goods markets is the downward pressure on wages and prices.  Importantly, the weak demand for labor is evident in last year’s widely dispersed slowdown in wage growth.  Going forward, the downward pressure on prices from slack is offset by anchored inflation expectations and higher commodity prices. As noted in the Tealbook, higher commodity prices seem to be driven by greater demand and by supply shortfalls, not speculation.  In particular, after examining high-frequency data, our staff found no evidence that commodity prices jumped right after our announcements of large-scale asset purchases and monetary accommodation that have taken place since early 2009.  Of course, only a small portion of the surge in commodity prices will pass through to core inflation.  On balance, we expect core PCE inflation to remain at or a bit less than 1 percent both this year and next. Before wrapping up, let me say that, in light of yesterday’s discussion on structural unemployment, I’m now seeing the ongoing search process for a new 12th District president in a different light.  [Laughter]  For example, I’m no longer taking it so personally when people use the terms “mismatch” and the “12th District president situation” in the same sentence.  In addition, I realize I need to have a chat with our search committee about the concept of low recruiting intensity.  [Laughter]  In any case, I’m hoping, as I’m sure you are, that if the ongoing nature of the opening is the result of a structural problem, it’s the type that will dissipate soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of a summary of various economic indicators and opinions. There is some humor and self-deprecating comments, but no actual disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And maybe the wage will move over time.  [Laughter]  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not express or indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 240.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  A hard act to follow, so I’ll stick to business.  The data we’ve seen over the last couple of months is notably better than we were expecting just two or three months ago.  The cumulative effect for me is much more confidence that the recovery is firmly in place and has picked up speed. What we’ve seen in the Fifth District is consistent with this assessment.  I’ll start with the household sector.  Nothing is more central to the recovery than the revival of consumer spending, and, in our surveys, the diffusion index for retail sales has been notably weak throughout most of the recovery and, as recently as November, stood at minus 16.  In December it swung to plus 25, and the reading for January improved further to plus 33.  Our broader service sector index has shown improvement similar to that of the ISM nonmanufacturing index at the national level.  It rose to plus 21 in December, and that’s the highest level in several years.  It came to plus 12 in January, which is still a positive reading.  I won’t recite more of these District numbers, but, like the other regional diffusion indexes, our manufacturing measure was strongly positive for December and January—I think we’ve heard similar reports from Philadelphia and other Districts. Our anecdotal reports this month also support a more confident view about the recovery.  One noticeable swing in recent months is current reports from some of our banking contacts, who are reporting improvements in loan quality and the emergence of new loan activity.  More broadly, outside of banking, we’ve also heard noticeably more positive reports and fewer negative reports than in the recent past. Turning to the national economy, I agree with the Tealbook that we’ve entered the new year carrying more pace than seemed likely a few months ago.  Several developments stand out.  Consumer spending growth has picked up and now looks more solid than it once did.  Labor markets are improving.  Private employment continues to expand at a somewhat increasing pace.  Initial unemployment claims continue to fall.  The NFIB hiring plans index surged, and real disposable income is on an upswing.  In addition, I think investment in nonresidential structures has not been quite as weak as some of us had anticipated, and that suggests we may have reached a bottom in commercial construction now. All in all, I think a more bullish view of the outlook is warranted.  In my projections, I’ve written down 3.9 percent for GDP growth for 2011—spurious precision, perhaps, but close to the Tealbook’s forecast.  Obviously one wants to be careful about reacting to the data in marking up one’s outlook, but I think the improvement in the outlook is unmistakable. The inflation outlook is also firmer now, I think, than it was several months ago.  The Tealbook estimates that PCE inflation was 2.3 percent over the three months ending in December.  Measures of near-term inflation expectations, both TIPS-based and survey-based, have moved up by roughly a percentage point since the summer—a fairly substantial move.  The surge in energy and commodity prices obviously has played a role, but our experience with such surges in the past several years suggest that they’ll show up soon in core inflation as well.  I also think there’s little doubt that deflation risks are notably reduced now and fairly minimal. In sum, I think this recovery is looking less in need of monetary stimulus than it did a few months ago.  Personally, I seriously doubt that our asset purchases have made a material contribution to the improvement in the outlook over the last few months.  If we continue to get economic reports consistent with stronger growth—two reasonably healthy payroll employment reports, for example—then I think at the March meeting we’re seriously going to want to consider scaling down our purchase program.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's confidence in the recovery and positive outlook for the economy.


Passage number 241.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement of gratitude and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 242.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy continues to improve at a moderate pace.  Many businesses report stronger revenue, better profitability, and improved household consumption.  Holiday retail sales were quite robust.  Some businesses plan to boost capital expenditures during 2011, and there are a few tentative indications that firms in the District may be more inclined to hire new workers this year.  This is the first time that I have heard even tentative indications of that. Residential real estate in the District remains weak.  Some parts of the District, in fact, seemed to experience renewed deterioration in conditions during the second half of 2010.  Agribusiness in the District continues to be characterized by optimism for 2011, driven in part by higher prices for many of its products.  There seems to be increasing anecdotal evidence of land prices accelerating beyond what seems to be supported by fundamentals.  That’s something I’ll be keeping an eye on in 2011. Large businesses headquartered in the District continue to report brisk business and remain optimistic for this year.  Booming Asia continues to be an outsized factor for many of these firms, but most are also reporting good results for domestic business.  Europe, so far, remains a steady source of business for these firms.  I did not detect problems in the EU, at this point, from the perspective of these businesses. Nationally, prospects for the economy seem to have improved rather markedly relative to last summer.  I attribute part of the improvement to this Committee’s asset purchase program.  I think that this program did four things.  It put downward pressure on short-term real yields, it put upward pressure on expected inflation as measured by market-based TIPS, it contributed to a rally in equity markets, and it contributed to downward pressure on the trade-weighted value of the dollar.  In my view, these are classic signs of monetary policy easing.  They are exactly what you’d expect to observe had we been able to lower the funds rate substantially in reaction to weaker signs from the economy.  So, to me, this recent experience shows that the asset purchase policy can be used effectively to substitute for ordinary monetary policy, although, whether the Committee wishes to use this tool is, of course, dependent on the judgment of the members. I would also say that the asset purchase program has been very successful in getting the focus off of the federal funds rate and how long it will be at zero and moving the focus on to balance sheet policy instead.  So I think the signaling aspect has been extremely valuable to the Committee.  It is, of course, too early to make a complete assessment of the program.  In particular, most measures of actual core inflation from one year ago remain below 1 percent.  I would like these to move higher before I feel completely comfortable that the downside risk on inflation has been mitigated effectively, but we will have to see how these measures evolve during 2011.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and giving their opinion on various economic factors.


Passage number 243.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude followed by the sender's name and title.


Passage number 244.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 245.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 246.
   MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, am encouraged by recent news suggesting that, outside of housing and nonresidential construction—sectors which remain mired in gloom—private spending and production gained some momentum toward the end of last year.  The improved tone of the data is mirrored in the anecdotal reports I hear.  Businesses seem slightly more optimistic about future sales and a bit more willing to hire and invest.  The more positive tone of the data improves my confidence that the recovery is on firmer footing and will gradually pick up steam going forward.  My modal forecast has changed only marginally in response to incoming data, but my assessment of the risks to the outlook for economic growth and inflation has become more balanced. The forecast I prepared for today’s meeting is very close to that in Tealbook and in my November projection.  I raised my forecast of economic growth in 2011 by a few tenths of a percent, reflecting upside surprises in consumer and investment spending and the enactment of the fiscal package.  But these positives were offset by developments since November, suggesting a deeper and more persistent housing downturn and steeper declines in house prices than I previously anticipated.  The large overhang of existing homes for sale, the bulging foreclosure pipeline, the inability of homeowners with negative equity to trade up, and continuing tight lending standards are depressing house prices throughout the country.  I expect the resulting negative wealth effects to take a toll on consumption. For 2012, I lowered my growth forecast a few tenths to reflect the shift from this year to next year in the onset of fiscal drag.  All in all, I now anticipate that, by the end of 2013, the level of real GDP will be a few tenths higher and unemployment a tenth or so lower than my November forecast.  The essential contours of my forecast are unchanged.  I envision a recovery that will strengthen but proceed slowly by postwar standards.  As a consequence, unemployment will decline only very gradually, remaining around 7 percent at the end of 2013. Turning to inflation, I have been surprised by the sharp upward movement in commodity prices, but data on core prices, compensation, and unit labor costs have been consistent with my previous forecast.  And I continue to project that inflation will remain notably below the 2 percent level that I consider consistent with our dual mandate and will rise only minimally over the forecast period.  A key issue with which I grappled during this round was how much to revise up my forecast of consumer spending in response to stronger incoming data.  I ultimately decided that the staff’s decision to revise up the level of consumer spending, but not the growth rate beyond mid-2011, is a sensible and balanced response.  It seems dangerous to overblow the significance of the surprise when it is out of line with the fundamentals, particularly changes in employment, wages, and wealth.  As David discussed in his presentation yesterday, these factors have had a remarkably good track record in explaining fluctuations in consumer spending and the personal saving rate since the onset of the crisis. Of course, perceptions concerning current and future labor market conditions and income, and other factors, like access to credit, also influence consumption, and the staff tried to capture these influences with measures of sentiment.  Yesterday’s jump in confidence in the Conference Board survey suggests some improvement, but other surveys thus far reveal no significant or sustained rebound, even though most measures of sentiment are off their recessionary lows.  Moreover, as David noted, the staff forecast assumes that sentiment will improve going forward, and the Tealbook growth forecast stands well above the Blue Chip consensus and near the top of our own central tendency. On the labor market, in spite of December’s drop in the unemployment rate, the number of new jobs in recent months has fallen short of the number needed just to accommodate the growing population.  The decline in labor force participation, very modest gains in wages and compensation, and continuing perceptions in surveys that jobs are exceptionally difficult to obtain, all suggest that the labor market remains quite weak.  I interpret the quit rate—the fraction of employed workers who voluntarily resign their jobs to search, exit the labor force, or take another job immediately—as a good measure of fear and perceived opportunity.  Papers prepared and circulated for yesterday’s discussion show that the quit rate is exceptionally depressed.  The quit rate is now above the lows reached in the depth of the recession, but I take the very modest increase as a signal that improvement in the labor market is, thus far, quite modest. The most significant change in my forecast versus November pertains to my assessment of the balance of risks.  In November, I considered the risk to both economic growth and inflation as weighted to the downside, and I now consider them balanced.  On the downside, I am particularly concerned about spillovers to spending and financial markets from further house prices declines and consider the risks well illustrated by the two alternative simulations in Tealbook.  And, of course, spillovers to financial markets from European sovereign debt developments are a continuing source of downside risk.  That said, I see more upside risk now that the recovery will be stronger than my modal forecast.  For example, auto sales were quite strong during the fourth quarter, and this could foreshadow more robust spending due to pent-up demand for durables than is incorporated in the Tealbook baseline.  I was struck that that baseline envisions declining vehicle stocks per capita over the entire forecast period. With respect to inflation, like market participants, I am less concerned about deflationary risk than in November.  Spikes in commodity prices create upside risks, but I agree with Tealbook’s assessment that any pass-through to core inflation is apt to be quite modest.  And I read the anecdotal reports as suggesting that firms still have little or no pricing power.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their assessment of the current economic situation and their forecast for the future.


Passage number 247.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude followed by a salutation.


Passage number 248.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. "Thank you. Governor Duke" simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 249.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage consists of a simple statement without any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 250.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Raskin without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 251.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economy has entered 2011 with more momentum.  We’re seeing promising upticks in business investment in equipment and software, and potentially sustainable increases in industrial production.  Appearing positive but not yet definitively propelling are improvements in auto sales and net exports, which are also moving demand.  Conditions in the labor market have improved modestly, but considerable slack remains.  Despite these upward positive trends, the housing market, in particular, continues to be troubled and is exerting downward pressure on economic growth.  The housing market shows no signs of emerging from the significant overhang of real estate that is in foreclosure or entering the foreclosure process. I continue to be troubled by the failure of financial institutions to address comprehensively the underlying causes of mortgage documentation and related servicing problems.  Giving short shrift to these problems unnecessarily elongates the pace of sales of foreclosed properties, which contributes to lower priced and lower quality housing stock, both of which will result in weaker consumer demand and stunted national growth until addressed. In addition to these persistent operational risk factors in servicing, home foreclosure rates will likely be higher this year as financial institutions publicly assert that they have fixed their internal servicing problems and restart the foreclosures that had previously been halted.  In other words, the properties subject to foreclosure that were held back by financial institutions during the robo-signing period will most likely come to market, and these surges will increase the uncertainty of supply, resulting in further uncertainty regarding home values.  If more documentation and processing problems resulting from operational inadequacies come to light, the delays in the recovery in the housing market will be extended.  In addition to the elevated volume of home foreclosures, elevated inventories of unsold homes and high vacancy rates for commercial properties contribute to the overhang exerting downward pressure on home values.  The quality of many homes also has deteriorated, resulting in more downward pressure on prices.  In short, the day of reckoning, when institutions that service loans address the failures in their processes and systems, apparently has yet to come, and, therefore, the process of clearing the housing market will remain fitful and unpredictable.  All of these possibilities could depress house prices, discourage potential homebuyers, and depress housing starts. I’m also not certain that the allowance for loan and lease loss reserving that banks have done in response to foreclosure-related investigations and litigation is adequate for future losses.  If such investigations and litigation entail significant cost, concerns could be renewed about the adequacy of bank capital.  There also could be further damage to the confidence of firms and households, leading to delays in purchases of business capital and consumer durables.  If severe deficiencies in reserves were to materialize, credit availability could again contract. Inflation expectations have remained anchored despite the fact that core inflation remains low.  This stickiness benefits the recovery by preventing the natural contraction in economic activity that would occur were real interest rates to rise more dramatically.  My previous forecast noted that reductions in employment, income, and wealth had left many households with the need to repair their severely distressed balance sheets.  In short, I don’t believe that consumer confidence has returned yet to the levels that would be necessary for a faster paced recovery. My previous forecast also noted continued uncertainty regarding the mortgage documentation problems, which, as I’ve described, act as a continuing drag on the resurgence of the housing market.  I believe these problems have not yet been resolved.  In fact, I think they could be exacerbated by related problems, such as the facts underlying the adverse ruling by the Massachusetts Supreme Court regarding mortgage assignments “in blank.” Neither my prior forecast nor my current one explicitly considers any additional, that is, beyond the baseline, effects of consolidation at the state level.  In particular, even after making deep spending cuts over the last two years, states continue to face large budget gaps.  At least 46 states struggled to close shortfalls when adopting budgets for the current fiscal year, which began July 1 for most states.  Fiscal year 2011 gaps total $130 billion or 20 percent of budgets in these 46 states.  To comment upon President Dudley’s observation that this shortfall is a small portion of GDP, I would add that these gaps come on top of the large shortfall that 46 states faced in fiscal years 2009 and 2010.  States could continue to struggle to find the revenue needed to support critical public services for a number of years, threatening hundreds of thousands of jobs.  Even for those states whose gaps have been filled and whose budgets are balanced, this story may not be over.  Families hit hard by the recession will experience the loss of vital services throughout the year, and the negative impact on the economy could then be prolonged.  In terms of federal aid to states, about $60 billion remains to mitigate these 2011 fiscal problems.  By 2012, this number will be $6 billion. Continued high unemployment could keep state income tax receipts at low levels and increase the demand for Medicaid and other essential services that states provide.  High unemployment combined with households’ diminished wealth due to fallen property values could continue to depress consumption.  Thus, sales tax receipts also would remain low.  These factors suggest that state budget gaps could continue to remain larger and last longer, themselves manifestations of a slow recovery.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is troubled by the housing market and the failure of financial institutions to address the underlying causes of mortgage documentation and servicing problems. The speaker believes that these problems are prolonging the pace of sales of foreclosed properties and contributing to lower priced and lower quality housing stock. The speaker also expresses uncertainty about the adequacy of bank capital reserves and the potential for further damage to confidence and credit availability. Overall, the speaker does not believe that the housing market has fully recovered and there are ongoing risks and uncertainties.


Passage number 252.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Thank you for a very good go-round.  It’s 10:55.  I understand coffee is ready.  Why don’t we take 20 minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows appreciation and agreement, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 253.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  David, did you have any report to make on data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 254.
 MR. STOCKTON.  We circulated a table on the new single-family home sales that came out this morning.5  As you can see, they rose a whopping 17.5 percent to 325,000 units.  However, to place that increase in perspective, I would direct your attention to the lower left panel that shows the graph.  I think this constitutes something pretty darn close to “moribund” in  5 The materials used by Mr. Stockton are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). our view.  We had been expecting some rebound at 315,000 units, so this is a little better than we expected, but not enough to change our basic story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Stockton describes the increase in single-family home sales as "whopping" and better than expected, but also refers to it as "moribund" and not enough to change their basic story. This suggests that there is disagreement or mixed opinions about the significance of the increase in sales.


Passage number 255.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I didn’t catch what you said about prime-age workers.  Were the statistics you were quoting about prime-age males or prime-age males and females.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for clarification.


Passage number 256.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’ll check it for you, but my recollection was all prime-age workers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they will check something, without contradicting anyone or expressing any disagreement.


Passage number 257.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 258.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  If there are no other questions or comments, let’s go ahead to the policy discussion, and I’ll ask Bill English to introduce this round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 259.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there any questions for Bill.  [No response]  Before we start the go-round, let me make a somewhat orthogonal comment.  In alternative C paragraph 5 there’s a reference in brackets to a numerical inflation target, which we put there as sort of a placeholder.  You may recall that we’ve been discussing off and on the issue of improving our communication and credibility by using a numerical target—we discussed it at the videoconference in October.  We have not yet come to any conclusion on that issue, despite the fact that there is quite a bit of interest in that approach around the table and that this may be a particularly good time from a political receptivity perspective.  So, as I mentioned last time, this might be something we want to keep alive as we go forward. After the last meeting, President Plosser came up to me and asked if he could be of any assistance on this, and I suggested that he might want to talk informally to a few people across the spectrum of the Committee to get a sense about whether there was any way forward on this.  He said he’d be glad to do that, and he spoke to a few people during the intermeeting period.  I wanted to mention this to everybody so that you’d know that some informal discussion has been going on, and I hope that’s okay.  It seems we’ve had plenty of formal processes on this in the past, and maybe just a few informal conversations could be useful.  Everybody is, of course, entitled to have his or her own conversations or to contact Charlie, as you wish.  If we make some progress in terms of a proposal or an approach, then perhaps we could turn it over to a more formal process and bring it forward to the Committee once again.  In any event, we surely would not make any change to our communications strategy without a full formal review and Committee decision.  Any concerns, questions.  [No response]  Okay, then let’s turn now to the policy go-round, and I have President Lacker first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 260.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  From the comments during the economic go-round, I think everyone acknowledges the extent to which the prospects for economic growth have improved over the last couple of meetings, although there’s also wide recognition of the need for a bit of caution about how exuberant one gets about them.  I’m in the camp of doubting that our asset purchases made a huge contribution to the improvement, notwithstanding your observations, Mr. Chairman.  I say that because I personally doubt that changes in long-term yields have been very important to firms’ investment and hiring decisions or to consumer spending decisions, which seem to have been at the core of the improvement in the outlook.  The way in which growth has strengthened has reduced my assessment of the likely benefits of our asset purchases.  I also doubt that we’ve had that much effect on yields so far.  At the same time, I think the stronger outlook brings forward the time when we’re likely to want to remove monetary stimulus.  To my mind, then, it has raised the risk that continued balance sheet expansion will prove excessive, in the sense that it sets back the starting point for us to remove stimulus. Let me note a couple of points.  One is that bank reserves have not changed much at all since we began this asset purchase program.  We’re about to see a $450 billion increase over the next two months in bank reserves, so that undergirds my sense that we haven’t seen much effect yet from what we’ve done, and we could well see a lot in the next couple of months.  The second point has to do with inflation, and I think you were correct, Mr. Chairman, in your comments about the importance of being careful with this surge in commodity prices that’s coming from overseas and affecting our headline inflation rate.  Our experience over the last couple of decades has been that there is a measurable effect on core inflation from these energy price surges, so that’s another justification for some caution about inflation going forward. For me, the case for continuing the program is eroding a bit.  I don’t think it’s reasonable to scale it back right now—in any event, we’ve done nothing to prepare markets for such a change, as is our well-established custom.  It does seem to me, however, that there’s a reasonable chance of data coming in over the next couple of months that are consistent with stronger economic growth.  And I think you’re right to highlight the employment report—if we were to get very strong employment reports in the next couple of months, I think that would change the whole tenor of the outlook markedly, both in markets and within our Committee, and I think we’d seriously want to consider adjusting our asset purchase program in March. In light of these thoughts, I see value in preparing markets for that possibility—not promising, but preparing them for that possibility through your testimony and through the minutes reflecting our concern about that possibility.  I actually liked the original version of the last sentence of paragraph 3 of alternative B, despite the fact that it seemed to imply that we didn’t review our program in December.  We used the future tense there and the present tense here. I also have concerns about other parts of the statement.  Paragraph 1 of alternative B seems more downbeat than I think we are around the table.  I think paragraph 1 in alternative C does a much better job of capturing where we are on the outlook.  In particular, this litany of factors restraining household spending seems a bit discordant, because, as you said, the big news in the fourth quarter was that consumer spending was stronger than we thought.  Therefore, I’d advocate substituting the first paragraph of alternative C for the first paragraph of alternative B. I have one more thing.  I applaud your initiating conversations and further discussions about an explicit numerical objective for inflation.  I would just add this observation about these four words, “or a bit less.”  In the past, I’ve brought up my brother-in-law sitting in front of retirement planning software and calling up his brother-in-law who is on the FOMC and asking him what number he should put in for inflation for the next 20 years.  And I’m wondering what I’d tell him if our objective was “2 percent or a bit less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, expresses doubt about the effectiveness of the asset purchase program and raises concerns about the potential risks and inflation. He also suggests alternative changes to the statement, indicating his disagreement with certain parts of it.


Passage number 261.
” MR. WARSH.  We’re going to get to that in the communications section.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Warsh states that they will discuss the communications section later, implying a planned order of discussion rather than disagreement.


Passage number 262.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  Even though I’ve advocated 1½ percent, I’d be happier with 2 percent than with “2 percent or a bit less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It only mentions the speaker's personal preference for a particular percentage.


Passage number 263.
”  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude to President Rosengren.


Passage number 264.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as written.  We should stay the course.  Inflation remains well below my inflation target and output well below potential through 2012.  With the very low inflation rate forecasted to continue for several years, we have ample room to be accommodative and encourage more rapid growth.  I expect to complete the entire purchase program.  Our purchase program is certainly consistent with our dual mandate.  In fact, it would be justified if we had a sole mandate of targeting 2 percent inflation over the medium term.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their support for alternative B and their belief that the current course of action should be maintained. They also mention that inflation is below their target and output is below potential, indicating a need for accommodative measures and encouraging more rapid growth. The speaker also expresses their expectation to complete the entire purchase program and states that it is consistent with their dual mandate. There is no indication of disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 265.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only contains a expression of gratitude.


Passage number 266.
 MR. FISHER.  Could you take a little bit longer, President Rosengren, with your summary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Fisher is politely requesting President Rosengren to provide a more detailed summary, suggesting a desire for additional information rather than expressing disagreement.


Passage number 267.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "laughter" and the title "President Kocherlakota," but does not provide any context or information to suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 268.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I think that in 2004 there was an occasion where the language changed at one meeting and then there was an increase at the subsequent meeting.  So there was only a one-meeting delay between the language change and the action.  Obviously we can work that through.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a sequence of events and expresses an understanding that the situation can be further analyzed.


Passage number 269.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Plosser.


Passage number 270.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is a simple expression of thanks from President Pianalto.


Passage number 271.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The data since the last meeting have been more positive, but I do not think the change has been significant enough to warrant a shift in our policy.  The economy is still facing substantial headwinds, and the inflation rate remains very low. I did find the mention of an inflation target in alternative C to be an intriguing addition.  I’m quite supportive of more firmly establishing a numerical objective for price stability, and I look forward to being able to put a sentence such as the one that is in alternative C into our statement in the not-too-distant future.  But, as Bill English mentioned, I don’t think we are ready to take that step today.  We still have some work to do to prepare the public to understand why a numerical objective should be seen as an improvement in our policy framework and how we intend to operationalize the objective.  I also recognize that, before we can prepare the public, we need to work through some of our own differences of views on the role of the numerical objective in our policy process.  Nevertheless, I do believe that there is much common ground within the Committee on this issue, and I would be in favor of having a structured discussion of this issue very soon. Regarding the language options in alternative B, I favor adding the updated $80 billion pace of asset purchases.  And given that every word change is scrutinized, I have a slight preference for keeping the last sentence in paragraph 3 the same as it was in our December statement.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and also mentions an intriguing addition in alternative C. They mention that there is still work to be done to prepare the public and work through differences of views, but overall they believe there is common ground within the Committee. The speaker also expresses a preference for certain language options.


Passage number 272.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply consists of a thank you message from someone named President Bullard. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 273.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B for today.  I would counsel that we wait a meeting before adopting something like paragraph 1 from alternative C.  Although I am sympathetic to that, I wouldn’t do it at this meeting.  I also think that the “continued its practice of regularly reviewing” clause is fine.  Basically, I think it is too early to consider deviating from our November decision at this juncture.  I would urge the Committee to take the idea that the program is reviewable and changeable very seriously, and I want to advocate that adjustments could be made in either direction, depending on the performance of the economy, and remind everyone that the economy does tend to be uncooperative with our best forecasts.  Adjustments could be very slight.  For instance, the pace of purchases could be slowed while simultaneously moving back the end date of the program, keeping the total amount of purchases unchanged.  This might be viewed as giving the Committee more time to assess the strength of the economy during 2011, if that was considered desirable. I agree with President Plosser that the March/April time frame will be the appropriate period to consider any changes to the course of action agreed to in November and, hopefully, to set, or at least to sketch out, an appropriate policy course for the second half of 2011. I would also stress that monetary policy is an ongoing process, and not a series of one-time actions.  I would implore all of you to stay away from the idea that there is such a thing as QE3.  There is a continuing process of balance sheet policy.  Management of the balance sheet will remain important for some time, and I encourage the Committee to think in terms of active management, either higher or lower, for the foreseeable future. I think commodity prices bear watching, and I want to comment on President Evans’s notion of commodity prices.  President Evans said, “Maybe they don’t matter, because they do not seem to enter a regression once the regression has lagged inflation.”  My comment is as follows:  A good inflation-targeting central bank, which I, of course, think that we are, will find that only the inflation target matters.  You keep taking actions to keep inflation close to target, and then, when you run a regression, you find that it is only lagged inflation that matters, because the policymaker is taking appropriate action to keep inflation near target.  But that seems to me to be different from saying that you shouldn’t take the signals that the economy is sending you as a reason to take action. I also now think that the rise in commodity prices in the spring of 2008 badly damaged the U.S. economy, at least in retrospect, and exacerbated problems that already existed in financial markets, eventually leading to the collapse of many of the nation’s largest financial houses.  So we have to be very much on guard about this commodity price issue this time around.  I also agree with you, Mr. Chairman, that global interactions are a key concern going forward.  I have written on this.  I have strong opinions on this, but I am going to spare all of you my comments on this and save that for another day.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and their caution about adopting paragraph 1 from alternative C. They also agree with the idea that the program is reviewable and changeable and advocate for adjustments to be made based on the performance of the economy. The speaker also agrees with President Plosser's suggestion of considering changes in the March/April timeframe and emphasizes the ongoing nature of monetary policy. They also express agreement with President Evans's comment on commodity prices and emphasize the need to be cautious about their impact on the economy. The speaker agrees with the Chairman's concern about global interactions but chooses not to comment further on it. Overall, the speaker expresses their support for certain ideas and proposals while adding their own perspective and concerns without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 274.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 275.
 MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  A few minutes ago, President Evans used an analogy involving “da Bears,” but as a non-Chicagoan I wasn’t really fooled a bit by the Bears’ regular season success.  [Laughter]  To me, it was clearly noise and not signal, as it relates to the playoffs.  Then, a few days ago, President Fisher compared monetary policy with playing a higher level, multidimensional chess game.  I was never much of a chess player—even at two dimensions, I couldn’t figure it out.  So I thought about what analogy I might use, and I recognize that I do have a fondness for Formula 1 racing, which I learned the other night I have in common with President Lacker.  So that is where I’ll go today. The financial crisis was like an in-race accident, and our race car had to undergo major repairs.  Now we are back in the race, but facing a large gap that developed with the lead cars—a gap which I will equate to the resource slack in our economy.  I expect very fast GDP growth this year with the economy running on all cylinders.  But it is important not to confuse fast growth with full or near-full employment.  Just because you are running faster laps than the leaders doesn’t mean you are going to catch them soon when you are running from as far back as we are.  Even with fast growth, it’s going to be a long trip to full employment.  And this distinction between growth and levels seems crucial to me for our policy communications.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal perspective and using analogies to explain their point, but there is no conflict or disagreement with any specific individual or idea.


Passage number 276.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a simple expression of gratitude by President Hoenig.


Passage number 277.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Today we have talked about evidence that the economy is growing at a more sustainable pace, and I certainly agree with that.  I also see further upside risk to current forecasts, as do the analysts in most of the recent Blue Chip surveys, and I do think that the first paragraph in alternative C is more appropriate than the one in alternative B.  The economy is undergoing a major and necessary rebalancing.  It is taking place, and I think it is risky to try to accelerate that.  We must be careful.  The process takes time. We should, therefore, begin to remove policy accommodation slowly to make it more balanced as the economy rebalances.  Obviously, an early challenge we face is to reduce the large and growing level of excess reserves.  I am not concerned with the ability of our reserve draining tools.  We have tested them, and I think they are sufficient.  My greater concern is the natural tendency of this Committee to delay the start of removing policy accommodation, leading to new financial imbalances and longer-term inflationary pressures. I very much agree with President Kocherlakota, in that I think we should begin to think about exit now, so that we can address it in a timely and systematic way.  Bill English commented today that if we change the language, we’ll upset the markets—I agree with that, and we’re going to hear it over and over.  That encourages us to delay our actions.  But the longer we delay, the greater will be the disruption, both expected and actual, to markets when we do move to tighten.  So we have to keep that in mind, and that’s why I think this analysis that President Kocherlakota outlined is so important.  The first step that we have to take will be to shift our public statements from indicating a need for more monetary stimulus to indicating sufficient stimulus is in place to attain our long-run goals of maximum employment and stable prices.  I won’t go into detail on the wording in the paragraphs, because I’ve already indicated that I agree with looking at this longer term. I also want to discuss price targeting.  My inclination is to favor it.  Rather than calling it a target of 2 percent or a bit less, we can talk about the central tendency of participants being 2 percent or a bit less.  I know we think that’s the right thing, but I want to point out that this crisis we just went through was not caused by missing our inflation target.  It was caused by our fear of deflation, which caused us to push real and nominal rates down for an extended period of time, and that led to asset price bubbles and the consequences of their bursting.  Therefore, adopting an inflation target doesn’t mean we will not find ourselves causing other imbalances in the future, unless we take a look at our policy as more than inflation targeting.  I will end with that.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is contention in the passage. The speaker agrees with the idea that the economy is growing at a sustainable pace, but disagrees with the tendency of the committee to delay the start of removing policy accommodation. The speaker also expresses disagreement with the idea that adopting an inflation target will prevent future imbalances unless policy is looked at more comprehensively.


Passage number 278.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any information that suggests contention or disagreement. The mention of thanking the individual named "President Lockhart" does not indicate disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 279.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I think the wording in paragraph 1, with the slight updates, is appropriate as presented.  I think President Fisher suggested in a note before the meeting adding a clause to the end of paragraph 2 that said something like: “though there are indications that the recovery is strengthening.”  I am sympathetic with that, because I think that most of our 2011 forecasts, including my own, have been revised higher, and I don’t think that is inconsistent with paragraph 1. I support keeping the “extended period” language in paragraph 4.  I think the phrasing still pertains, and I am wary of making a change at this juncture, given the intense attention this phrase has had in past months and the likelihood that dropping it or stating an explicit date would set off an unintended market response and certainly would mislead markets regarding how policy may play out. With respect to the addition of the numerical inflation target language bracketed in alternative C, paragraph 5, I am hesitant to support this in this statement.  I do, in general, support the notion of a more explicit inflation objective as part of our framework.  However, I think that further official policy communication moves in that direction ought to be taken only after the Committee has come to a more formal decision about whether and how to implement a more explicit inflation target. On the question of dropping or adding guidance on the quantity of purchases to $80 billion—here comes a double negative, which I love—I see no reason not to include the language that was added yesterday that raises the number from $75 to $80 billion.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Lockhart expresses his support for certain statements and suggestions but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 280.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 281.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you. Governor Yellen" simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Yellen without indicating any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 282.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  I’m comfortable with the wording of the first paragraph of B as it stands, but I could support a mild upgrading of the outlook along the lines that President Lockhart suggested.  Although incoming data have strengthened my confidence that the risks have become more balanced, my modal outlook has changed very, very little since our last meeting.  I continue to anticipate that unemployment will remain undesirably high and inflation undesirably low—below the 2 percent rate that the majority of the Committee has indicated is their preferred inflation objective—for the foreseeable future. With respect to policy, I’m comfortable for now with our current stance.  Optimal policy simulations and rule-based recommendations in Tealbook indicate that economic conditions continue to call for a highly accommodative policy.  By the various metrics in Tealbook, we do not have our foot too heavily on the gas.  With respect to our LSAP program, I continue to think that the bar for not completing the announced $600 billion of purchases should be high, and that hurdle has not been breached.  My reading of the evidence is similar to yours, Mr. Chairman.  I think the program has had a modest but positive impact on financial conditions, and it may deserve some credit for diminishing market anxiety about deflation.  Fears that the program could cause an outsized decline in the dollar or trigger a rise in inflation expectations have not materialized.  We should continue to evaluate the program in light of incoming evidence, but I don’t think the proposed change to the last sentence of paragraph 3 is needed or desirable.  Any change at all in the wording will arouse market speculation about our intentions, so I would prefer to keep the language identical to December. With respect to our external communications regarding future policy in the days ahead, I think we should be clear that we recognize the need to withdraw policy stimulus as the economy recovers and that we have the tools and commitment to do so.  I see an advantage in emphasizing the Committee’s commitment to a specific numerical inflation objective.  As the discussion in Tealbook makes clear, a well-understood and credible commitment would provide protection should the timing of our exit—in spite of our best efforts—turn out to be too late.  I think markets are aware of the Committee’s inflation goals, but it could be advantageous to strengthen this commitment by making it explicit, as in alternative C.  Clearly, we would need to lay the groundwork before adopting a numerical objective, but I support the efforts of President Plosser on this initiative, and I think this could be a good time to make progress on a longstanding communications goal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 283.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Thank you." and "Governor Warsh" are expressions of gratitude and an address, respectively, without any indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 284.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  President Bullard said that he hoped there was no such thing as QE3.  I don’t think I heard that the way he intended it, but it did pique my interest.  [Laughter]  Not to re-litigate old battles here—I suspect many of us have not changed our ex ante views in light of incoming information—but my sense is that we would not be the first in Washington to declare a highly debatable policy an enviable success and end it in due course. On what basis could we say it was a success.  We could, I think rightly, look at the change in the deflation risks and—much more so than any great successes on financial markets or employment or GDP—take perhaps more credit for the change in inflation risks between the time we announced the program and the time that we pivoted away from it.  So I think that is the way we hope that the $600 billion program is “successfully” accomplished, and we move on.  The name of the game strikes me as always having been about what’s next.  It was rarely a question of whether we were going to do what we said we were going to do.  I think we are going to live up to our word and do the $600 billion, but the markets are still questioning what happens next.  In light of that, Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative B. Regarding the language in paragraph 1, let me start by saying that I think President Kocherlakota described a sequencing we all had in mind some time ago as we were provisionally thinking about exit.  Perhaps at the March meeting, or at a meeting thereafter, we might want to describe the pivot in a way that markets could come to understand without adding unnecessary uncertainty.  One way to do this is to make the first paragraph quite a bit more upbeat than paragraph 1 in alternative B, even if the rest of the language in the statement were exactly as it is now.  That would, I think, be a very useful way to signal to markets that we have with some conviction changed our view to the upside on the status of growth, and would make them aware that there is a very serious debate about policy going forward.  So with that chess move in front of us, it strikes me, frankly, that alternative B as written might be a little more cautious than current market expectations.  Markets seem to be more enamored with the recent economic data than I sense that this group is.  If we left the first paragraph of B as it is now and the data come in on the upside, as we would hope between now and March, that might give us a very nice way to describe in some careful, methodical way our change in views.  Partly for that reason, and partly because I think the consensus in this room is closer to paragraph 1 in B than in C, I’d favor B as it is now with a view towards exit and next steps. On paragraph 3, Mr. Chairman, I think staff has now rewritten this $80 billion per month in a way such that it shows that the $80 billion is the arithmetic that comes out of the steady commitment to do $600 billion.  So I’m certainly open to the suggestion of President Fisher to end the sentence at “2011,” but if New York and Brian and the guys feel that the per month basis is the way in which they’ve communicated it and they’d rather that communication come from us than the New York Desk, I think we’ve at least mitigated the risk that they overread what the $80 billion per month is.  To the extent we do add that new red language with $80 billion per month, I think that’s additional impetus not to change another word in paragraph 3.  So I prefer the bracketed language to the new language therein.  I support alternative B with those suggestions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 285.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a polite expression of gratitude directed towards Governor Duke. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 286.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  The outlook looks a little brighter than it did the last time we met, and most around this table seem a bit more confident.  Indeed, most of my conversations with bankers started with comments like, “Things look a little bit better,” and “people have a little more spring in their step.”  So there does seem to be a little more optimism. On the question about reserves, I’ve been paying a lot of attention not only to changes in our balance sheet, but also to changes in the aggregate balance sheet of banks, and I’ve been trying to think about what that might cause banks to do.  My conclusion right now is that reserves are unlikely to affect either the price and availability of credit, or financial conditions, or even the economy, unless there’s a significant change in either loan demand or deposit supply.  Right now there is just so much liquidity that I don’t think the change in reserves is having much effect, so I’m not concerned about that at the moment. At the same time, the market seems pretty convinced that we’re going to purchase the full $600 billion in Treasuries, no more and no less.  So with all of the potential uncertainty in the outlook—whether it comes from house prices or commercial real estate or state and local governments or potential spillover from peripheral Europe—it makes no sense for us to tinker with the one thing about which there seems to be a little certainty. Turning to the language, I want to make sure that we don’t send a signal that we don’t intend to send—and I didn’t get the feeling that anybody around the table wanted to send such a signal.  Regarding the first paragraph, I could live with the version from alternative B or C, and I’m not sure which one I would vote for if you forced us to choose one or the other.  In paragraph 3, I have a strong preference for stopping the sentence at “second quarter of 2011” and leaving out the discussion about the pace of purchases forever.  The reason is that I think if we’ve given the total amount and we’ve given the time, then that calculation is left to anybody to figure out, whereas now we’re in a position of having to change from $75 billion to $80 billion, which might give the impression that we’re doing some tinkering and fine-tuning.  I think it points up the risk of having both the pace and the total amount in the statement.  But if we’re going to have an amount in the statement, I think it has to be the right amount.  I don’t think it makes sense to have an amount that we know to be incorrect. For all of the same reasons, I would go back to the original language and would not use “continued its practice of.”  The change in tense is not conveying any important information that I can see, and it might give people the erroneous impression that we’re intending to signal that we’re having more of a conditional discussion than we actually are. On the inflation target language, the problem I have with inserting that, first of all, is that I think it would be interpreted as much as a political statement about this whole discussion about our dual mandate as it would be any statement of our intentions.  Inserting ourselves into that question about our mandate seems to me to raise all kinds of questions about independence.  I think we have the right to independence about how we get to our mandate, but we don’t really have independence as to what our objectives are, so I’d be very uncomfortable about putting it in there.  Also, if we’re going to put a number on inflation and we have the dual mandate, it seems to argue for a number on unemployment, and in fact, I had the “2 percent or a little less” in a speech in January, and the very first question I got from the audience was, “Well, if that’s your number for inflation, what’s your number for unemployment.”  And I think that’s a little difficult. Finally, I’m still not certain that we can agree on what that number is, even if we decided to put the number in the statement.  Those are my comments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses their own preferences and opinions, but there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 287.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It consists of a simple expression of thanks followed by the title and name of Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 288.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is easy.  I associate myself with Kevin on everything he said about the language in alternative B.  I associate myself with Betsy on everything she said about inflation targeting.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement with two individuals on different topics, indicating consensus rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 289.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You beat Eric.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. The statement by Mr. Kocherlakota is a straightforward statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 290.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Trying to make yourself redundant, Governor.  [Laughter]  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage consists of an exchange between Governor Raskin and others, with laughter indicating a light-hearted tone. There is no apparent contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 291.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support the action described in alternative B and the statement in alternative B which reaffirms the intended increase in securities holdings and the pace of purchases that the Committee first announced in November.  The economic recovery is, in fact, continuing.  The growth in household spending picked up late last year, and business spending on equipment and software is rising.  However, housing and labor markets remain weak, and the action described in alternative B, I believe, reflects that.  The actions and language of alternative B should reinforce investor confidence that the economic recovery is proceeding and that employment and inflation are evolving in a manner consistent with a gradual return to levels more consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Adjustments to the program should not be made at this time.  The adverse consequences of unexpectedly discontinuing or reducing the current program would be unsettling to business and household confidence, and, given challenges in communicating, such a change would require great care.  In addition, there are significant benefits to waiting for additional information pertaining to the strength of the recovery and likely trajectory of inflation before deciding to make an adjustment to the stance of monetary policy. I also want to weigh in on the debate regarding the inclusion of the $80 billion.  President Lockhart stated it in the negative, seeing no reason not to include the language.  I think President Fisher has also raised some good points regarding the precedent it sets of always having to communicate in terms of what the monthly pace would be.  I just want to insert a somewhat different perspective on that language.  As the communications experts know best, there are several audiences listening and critiquing the performance of this Committee, and these audiences include financial participants on Wall Street as well as business participants on Main Street.  They include politicians of all ambitions.  In my case they include a neighbor who continues to corner me in the express lane at the grocery store right when I’m pinned in between the tabloids and the gum, asking for clarification.  [Laughter] I think we learned from the communications around the LSAP program that some of these audiences can only hold one number in their heads at a time.  That number, I think, currently is $600 billion.  So another perspective on this debate is that if we inject another number, in this case the number is $80 billion, to certain audiences it could appear to be something new, something that was recently decided, something that could be misinterpreted as a fresh round of money printing.  That is not at all what is intended, and that is not at all what has occurred or been decided at this meeting.  So, at the very least, I think putting in that number could encourage some kind of speculation about why the quantity of purchases implies a pace of $80 billion rather than $75 billion, and, given that this Committee has not made any change in the course of the LSAP program, we may need to consider whether the $80 billion figure will signal some kind of fine-tuning or something that we have not, in fact, decided.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker expressing support for alternative B and explaining their perspective on certain aspects of the proposed action. There is no direct argument or contradiction within the passage.


Passage number 292.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The phrase "Vice Chair" on its own does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It is simply a title or position.


Passage number 293.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  In terms of language, I think it’s okay to be a little cautious in terms of upgrading our economic outlook, as Governor Warsh suggested; if the news comes in good, then we can upgrade the outlook in the future, and I don’t see any reason to race ahead right now. In terms of the rest of the language in B, I think we should make the fewest changes possible.  I don’t see any reason to disturb the expectations that the market has that we’re likely to do $600 billion of large-scale asset purchases.  So I would not include the language about the $80 billion.  I just think that adds complication and detail that’s not really necessary, and I don’t think Brian thinks that’s necessary or helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and suggesting alternative B without opposing any other viewpoint. They simply state their reasons for favoring alternative B and explain why they do not think certain language should be included.


Passage number 294.
 MR. SACK.  The Desk wasn’t advocating putting $80 billion in the statement.  We’ve already moved to a purchase pace of $80 billion, and we’ve explained in our FAQs how to reconcile that with the FOMC statement.  I don’t think it has caused any confusion among market participants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It states a fact and the speaker's opinion that it has not caused any confusion.


Passage number 295.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And as far as the language about “will” or “continued,” I think it’s just better to leave well enough alone.  I just think there’s no reason for change.  If we make the change, people are going to be confused about why we’re making the change.  If the meaning is almost the same, what’s the point of making that small adjustment. In general, I just want to add two other thoughts.  I think we are a little bit at risk of getting ahead of ourselves here in the whole discussion about where we’re going.  If I remember correctly, there was a lot of excitement last winter about improvement in the economic outlook, and we shifted our focus away from other means we could take to make monetary policy more accommodative and shifted it toward exit, and that turned out to be premature.  So I think we have to remember that we haven’t gotten that much good data for that long.  We’re very far away from full employment, so I think a little bit of patience is appropriate. I think that’s also important in terms of our communications because we don’t want to give people the sense that we’re itching to exit just for the sake of exiting.  If we were to do that, it would cause people to tighten financial conditions, and that could actually potentially harm the economic growth outlook.  Obviously, if the inflation news turns worse, and if the economy is growing very robustly, then, of course, it’s appropriate to change.  But I think it’s very important not to get ahead of ourselves; we actually need to see economic information that warrants a change in policy. Finally, let me thank the staff for all their efforts preparing the material on the SOMA net income and the different environments for interest rates and the asset sale program.  I thought that was very useful for understanding the risks.  But I would emphasize that I consider these issues very secondary to the policy objectives of achieving our dual mandate.  In fact, I’d be quite happy if we had a very strong and sustained expansion that led us to tighten monetary policy and that resulted in a sharp decline in our net interest income.  In that case we’d obviously be a lot closer to achieving our dual mandate, but also the revenue-generating effects of a strong recovery would almost certainly overwhelm the effect of a drop in Federal Reserve remittances to the Treasury.  The goal here is not to maximize the Federal Reserve’s remittances to the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing the author's perspective and thoughts on the topic, but there is no direct disagreement with any other party or viewpoint.


Passage number 296.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Again, a good discussion. The economy is kind of like an ocean liner, which does take a while to move, and I think we have to be patient.  We are seeing signs of sustainable recovery, but they are still somewhat nascent; in particular, we haven’t seen any strong employment reports yet.  So I would advocate maintaining the status quo.  I do believe the policy has been helpful.  We can differ on exactly how much and in what way, but I do think it has been supportive of the recovery.  So I recommend alternative B. There was some discussion about strengthening paragraph 1 in B to make it like paragraph 1 in C.  I can make a quick proposal.  There are two differences between these two paragraphs.  One is that the paragraph in C strikes out the things that are constraining consumption growth, and the other is that the paragraph in C basically says business investment is rising and drops out the nonresidential part.  One proposal is the following, given that I think all the things that are affecting household spending are still relevant:  Where it says “business spending on equipment and software is rising,” insert a comma and then say, “though employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls.”  That drops a negative sentence, and that’s pretty consistent with the suggestion from President Fisher, for example, about firms investing in order to improve productivity rather than to improve employment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their views and recommendations, and suggesting a slight modification to a paragraph, but there is no indication of disagreement or disagreement among different parties.


Passage number 297.
 MR. FISHER.  So the sentence would take out “while investment in nonresidential structures is still weak”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage may include opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas that lead to disagreement or argument.


Passage number 299.
 MR. LACKER.  It makes it seem that the category of nonresidential structures is what has improved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating an observation that nonresidential structures have improved. There is no indication of any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 300.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s a little weird to take it out, given that it’s still very weak and that it was in the last statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or assessment about something being "weird" and "weak." There are no conflicting opinions or viewpoints presented.


Passage number 301.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, C says, “business investment is rising.”  Do you think that’s more accurate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply presents C's statement and asks for the listener's opinion without expressing any opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 302.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, but I’m saying that in the December statement we had, “while investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak.”  To take that out implies that somehow that’s no longer the case.  And that hasn’t changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and clarifying that the situation has not changed.


Passage number 303.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we had some indication that it was bottoming out.  We do change the emphasis periodically.  Does anyone have a view on this.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating some observations and then seeking other people's views on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 304.
 MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman, it’s the one thing, though, that hasn’t really changed.  That’s where I think there’s a bit of dissonance.  If you think it’s a good idea to up the optimism level a bit, I think a lot of people around the table would be open to suggestions, but I’m not sure that one does it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is expressing disagreement or contention with the idea of upping the optimism level. He mentions that there is "dissonance" and suggests that other people may not be open to the suggestion. This indicates a difference in opinion or disagreement on the topic.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, do we believe business investment is rising. PARTICIPANTS.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. All participants agree that business investment is rising.


Passage number 306.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are we okay with that.  How about “business investment is rising, though employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls”.  We look to the Research and Statistics staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents two separate ideas without expressing any disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 307.
 MR. STOCKTON.  It’s true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Stockton is presented as a fact that is agreed upon.


Passage number 308.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  I don’t know if it accomplishes what you want, but it’s true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that he is unsure if something accomplishes what the other person wants, but acknowledges its truthfulness.


Passage number 309.
 MS. YELLEN.  That still gets rid of the nonresidential portion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement being expressed. It appears to be a statement or suggestion by Ms. Yellen.


Passage number 310.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of only one word, "Right," which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 311.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Another option is to change the phrase “the economic recovery is continuing.”  Instead, we could say something like “the economic recovery has strengthened somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply suggests an alternative wording without expressing any disagreement or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 312.
”  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I’m willing to do that.  The only objection I had was that it would say “the economic recovery has strengthened, though at a rate…”  We’re confusing derivatives here.  It’s as if it’s strengthening but not strengthening fast enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a concern or objection regarding the wording, but there is no indication of a disagreement with another party. They are trying to clarify a potential confusion in the wording.


Passage number 313.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only mentions the title of Vice Chairman Dudley, without providing any context or indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 314.
  No, you could just say “and the growth rate is still not sufficient…” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the growth rate without presenting any opposing viewpoints or contradictory statements.


Passage number 315.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes, you could say it “strengthened, though the growth rate has ….”  That was one of my suggestions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher is expressing agreement with the statement or suggestion made previously.


Passage number 316.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This statement is an agreement or approval of a given situation, rather than expressing any kind of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 317.
 MR. LACKER.  Though it is still insufficient.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "Though it is still insufficient" implies that there is disagreement or dissatisfaction with something.


Passage number 318.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Are we okay with “has strengthened”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is asking for agreement or approval.


Passage number 319.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would say “has strengthened somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "has strengthened somewhat" is stating a personal opinion or assessment, rather than engaging in a debate or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
” MR. FISHER.  It has either strengthened or it hasn’t strengthened.  But the Chairman had an interesting suggestion.  Could you repeat your suggestion, please, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is stating that the suggestion made by the Chairman is interesting and requests it to be repeated. This implies that there may be a difference of opinion or viewpoint between Mr. Fisher and the Chairman.


Passage number 321.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states the position or title of Chairman Bernanke, there is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 322.
  “…has strengthened, though the rate of economic growth has been insufficient to bring down…” MR. FISHER.  I think that’s a fair statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher acknowledges that the statement given is fair and reasonable.


Passage number 323.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It is just a question of where you want to put it on the dial.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing a question of preference.


Passage number 324.
 MR. STOCKTON.  I have one small thing.  We’ll get the first reading on fourth-quarter GDP later this week.  We’ve written down 3.8, which is stronger than 2.6 percent, but the confidence interval around that number is really big.  And this current-quarter estimate of 3.8 is based on a 3½ percentage point contribution from net exports offset by a minus 3 percentage point contribution from inventories, both of which are poorly measured and subject to considerable uncertainty.  So while our reading of the economy is that things have strengthened, I just wanted to make clear that it’s not as if that number is written in stone at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating some information about the GDP and clarifying that there is some uncertainty surrounding the numbers.


Passage number 325.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You could say “appears to have strengthened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 326.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  May I ask indulgence to leave paragraph 1 in B as it is for now and to save changes in our text for next time.  I’d like to leave that paragraph as it is, if that’s okay, with the understanding that we will overcompensate in March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply requesting to leave paragraph 1 unchanged and make changes in the text at a later time.


Passage number 327.
 MR. TARULLO.  Kevin’s strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions someone's strategy without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 328.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That was Governor Warsh’s strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without further context. The passage merely states Governor Warsh's strategy without indicating any opposing views or conflicting opinions, so we cannot conclude if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 329.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  As long as we can use the word “rocking” in March, that will be fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement or acceptance with the use of the word "rocking" in March.


Passage number 330.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  But in which paragraph, Narayana.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 331.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only includes the name "Mr. Plosser" and "Mr. Chairman," indicating a dialogue or conversation is taking place. It does not provide any information about the content of the conversation or any disagreement.


Passage number 332.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, the passage itself is not provided in the question, so it is not possible to determine the specific source of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 333.
 MR.PLOSSER.  One way to address this is to make sure that the discussion in the minutes gives a little more positive sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It suggests that one possible solution to address a certain issue is to provide a more positive tone or perspective in the discussion documented in the minutes.


Passage number 334.
 MR. FISHER.  There was a more positive sense at the table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that there was a more positive sense at the table.


Passage number 335.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  My summary of the discussion begins, “The tenor of the incoming data has increased most participants’ confidence that a moderate recovery is under way and will continue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement summarizing a discussion.


Passage number 336.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s a good summary of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement is simply acknowledging that the preceding information or explanation is a good summary. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 337.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 338.
  MR. LACKER.  That’s rocking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement.


Passage number 339.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I gave it a try.  I did consider the “strengthening” phrase at the end of paragraph 2.  But, if you’ll notice, that creates a zigzag sentence where we’re happy, but we’re sad, but we’re happy.  [Laughter]  In paragraph 3, I’ve heard very different advice on the $80 billion.  I’m hearing from New York, though, that you think this is worse for markets rather than better for markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their thought process and different advice they have received.


Passage number 340.
 MR. SACK.  I just think it’s not necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 341.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The advantage of putting it in is that this is a parameter that we can move at some point if we were to change the pace while keeping the total.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a potential advantage of a certain action without presenting conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 342.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it’s highly unlikely, though, that we would want to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing an opinion or perspective without any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 343.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 344.
 MR. BULLARD.  Let me give an impassioned speech for keeping it in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, starts by expressing their intention to give an impassioned speech for keeping something in. Although we do not have information about what exactly they are referring to, there is no indication of disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 345.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Take it as read.  [Laughter]  All right, I take full responsibility for leaving it in.  I realize there’s a slight risk there, but there’s also a risk to dropping it.  It’s something that we could, in fact, vary if we taper or if we change the pace.  Let’s leave the next sentence as it was last time, and let’s drop the other change.  The only change in the statement, therefore, is to add the phrase about the pace of $80 billion.  Everything else is as written.  Okay.  Any other comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is calmly discussing a potential risk and suggesting a specific change to the statement.


Passage number 346.
 MS. SMITH.  Can I just make a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. Ms. Smith simply asks if she can make a comment.


Passage number 347.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation:


Passage number 348.
 MS. SMITH.  From a communications perspective, I really think that’s a mistake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Ms. Smith is expressing her opinion or perspective on something. However, there is no indication of contention or disagreement happening.


Passage number 349.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The $80 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is any contention or disagreement. It only provides a figure of $80 billion without any further context or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 350.
 MS. SMITH.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The word "yes" is the answer to the question, but no explanation is provided to support it.


Passage number 351.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right, explain why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the context or specific passage provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 352.
 MS. SMITH.  I think we’ve taught market participants to take every word of this statement seriously.  And I think it conveys a policy judgment that you all didn’t make.  So I’m comfortable that what is on the New York Fed website, as explained to me, has made this point.  I’m afraid that if you do this, it’s hard for us to explain that it really doesn’t mean much, particularly if you want to use it later to fine-tune:  Now this signifies nothing, but later it may signify something important.  So I think you want to hold that in reserve until you are really communicating something important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion and concerns.


Passage number 353.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Did she convince you, President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 354.
 MR. BULLARD.  I feel very strongly that this $600 billion number really hurt us, because it put us in the same category as a lot of others’ policy actions, and it got us away from the idea that this is ordinary monetary policy.  And I think the pace of purchases gets closer to saying it’s ordinary monetary policy. I’m a little miffed that we’re not at $75 billion.  It’s up to the Desk to keep us at $75 billion—I know there are technical factors involved.  I would very much like to keep it in.  And I saw the fact that we had the pace of purchases and the total amount as a compromise, and now we’d be pulling back from that, in my view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing the speaker's personal opinion and preference regarding the monetary policy and the pace of purchases.


Passage number 355.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, I agree.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Based on the given response "No, I agree. President Fisher," there is no indication of contention or disagreement. The statement suggests agreement with President Fisher without any opposing views or arguments present.


Passage number 356.
 MR. FISHER.  I feel equally passionately.  [Laughter]  So let us cancel each other out.  I would suggest that we listen to the good advice that Michelle just gave, because I think she is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging and agreeing with Michelle's advice.


Passage number 357.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I am going to take a straw vote, so I can share the responsibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their intention to take a straw vote.


Passage number 358.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I wasn’t sure what Michelle’s advice was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or disagreement. It simply mentions that Mr. Kocherlakota was unsure about Michelle's advice, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement between them.


Passage number 359.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Her advice was to drop the $80 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or disagreement regarding the suggestion of dropping the $80 billion. It simply states the advice without any indication of contention.


Passage number 360.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  And to stop at “the end of the second quarter of 2011”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "the end of the second quarter of 2011" is a specific time reference that does not invite debate or disagreement.


Passage number 361.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  All in favor of not having the $80 billion.  I count ten.  All in favor of including the $80 billion.  Okay, we’ll drop it.  President Bullard, your concern is noted, and we’ll take measures to try to make sure that all of the dimensions of our policy are reflected in our discussions.  Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges the different opinions on whether or not to include the $80 billion, but ultimately agrees to drop it based on the majority's decision. President Bullard's concern is also noted, indicating a willingness to address any potential issues.


Passage number 362.
 MR. SACK.  I just wanted to make it clear that the reason we’re in this situation is not that we haven’t been keeping pace.  It’s because the program didn’t start on November 1, but the “about $75” was calculated as if it did start November 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of explanation made by Mr. Sack.


Passage number 363.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We should have figured that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing a belief or realization.


Passage number 364.
 MR. SACK.  We thought “about” gave us enough flexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sack is explaining that they believed using the word "about" would provide them with enough flexibility.


Passage number 365.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Debbie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only consists of a greeting or acknowledgement.


Passage number 366.
 MS. DANKER.  This vote will encompass alternative B and the directive for alternative B from the packet.  I am going to read paragraph 3, just to make sure I’ve got it right, and we all know what we are voting on. Paragraph 3:  “To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to continue expanding its holdings of securities as announced in November.  In particular, the Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings and intends to purchase $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011.  The Committee will regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and the overall size of the asset-purchase program in light of incoming information and will adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the actions and intentions of the Committee without any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 367.
” Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke  Yes President Evans  Yes President Fisher  Yes President Kocherlakota Yes President Plosser  Yes Governor Raskin  Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes Governor Warsh  Yes Governor Yellen  Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  We have one more item, which is the communications issue.  We can try to do that now, or we can have a 20-minute lunch break.  Is there a preference.  People have flights.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states the agreement of various individuals on a certain matter.


Passage number 368.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  How about during lunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a neutral question and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 369.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We can do it during lunch, I suppose.  It’s only a question of speaking loudly, okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a specific time to do something and is simply considering the practicality of speaking loudly in that situation.


Passage number 370.
 MS. DANKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as only the name "MS. DANKER" is given, which does not provide any context or information.


Passage number 371.
  And keeping all— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  —the food away from the microphones.  All right, why don’t we break for lunch.  We’ll return here, and we’ll immediately go into this last item of discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of keeping the food away from microphones may imply a previous agreement or understanding among the speakers. The suggestion to break for lunch and then return to continue the discussion is also presented without any disagreement.


Passage number 372.
 [Break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s recommence the meeting, please.  Thank you.  I see Charlie coming, so we will just go ahead and get started.  The last item is on communication, and I want to thank the communications subcommittee for the work they have done and the ongoing discussions they have had.  So let me turn it over now to Janet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an update on the meeting and expressing gratitude towards the communications subcommittee.


Passage number 373.
  MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to begin by thanking Governor Duke and Presidents Fisher and Rosengren for serving with me on the subcommittee.  And I want to thank all of you for the very helpful input that you have given us so far. As you may recall, the Chairman gave our subcommittee a three-part charge.  He asked us first to assure appropriate treatment of confidential FOMC information, including our contacts with the press; second, we were to develop policies to avoid the perception that individuals outside of the Federal Reserve System are able to gain inappropriate access to FOMC information that could be valuable in forecasting monetary policy; and, third, we were to develop policies to ensure that the public communications of FOMC participants do not undermine the Committee’s decisionmaking process or the effectiveness of monetary policy. After consultation with many of you, the subcommittee thought that the best way to accomplish the first objective was to strengthen the Program for Security of FOMC Information by adding an explicit enforcement procedure, and yesterday afternoon you voted on an amendment designed to accomplish that.  So I consider that aspect of our work complete. To make progress on the remaining two charges, we thought it would be sensible to take them up sequentially.  Today we are particularly seeking your thoughts on how to address the second charge.  What policies should the Committee put in place to avoid perceptions that individuals outside the Federal Reserve System are able to gain inappropriate access to valuable FOMC information.  We’d like to hear your thoughts on this topic, and our hope is that we can return soon, potentially in March, with a revised proposal, and then return to the third question for discussion. We circulated a set of questions that you should have in front of you to guide discussion, and we’d like to have a full go-round of the Committee to hear your views.  We ask you to address three questions.  The first pertains to access.  Should there be limitations on access between FOMC participants and individuals or firms that stand to gain financially.  And, if so, where would you draw the line.  The second question pertains to content.  Should there be limitations on the content of meetings and conversations, if access is permitted.  And, third, if limitations on access and/or content are desirable, should we establish a formal policy concerning these matters, or simply develop some informal guidelines. On that issue, you may recall that, in our memo to you dated January 6, our subcommittee suggested that contacts with financially interested outsiders should, at least in our view, be addressed by a formal policy.  We’re concerned that any perception, whether it’s based in fact or not, that financially interested outsiders have inappropriate access to FOMC members or information creates severe reputational risks for the Federal Reserve.  Our subcommittee thought it important for the Committee to have in place a formal policy, the important thing being that it would be binding on all FOMC participants and not just a guideline that’s voluntary.  It would state, in effect, that it is not acceptable for FOMC participants to convey information—whether it’s covered by the Program for Security of FOMC Information or whether it’s outside of that program—that would be likely to confer financial advantage on particular private consultants and businesses. In contrast, we proposed in our subcommittee memo to you that other matters should be addressed by informal guidelines, matters such as the blackout period, guidelines about staking out firm positions, and so forth.  But we’re seeking your input and reaction on this question today, so the third question to you is:  Do you agree with our subcommittee that we need a formal policy on this.   Let me stop there and begin the go-round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no apparent contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is thanking others for their input and seeking their thoughts and reactions on certain topics.


Passage number 374.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "President Kocherlakota" alone does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 375.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank the subcommittee for their work on this.  I tend to agree with what Governor Yellen has said.  Given the kinds of risks that are involved for the Federal Reserve System in this matter, I think a formal policy is something that we should be thinking about.  I have to admit, though, that, since I have not engaged in any of this kind of activity myself, I’m not sure exactly what the formal policy should consist of.  Certainly, in considering the issue of potential limitations on content, the point that says, “You should not be characterizing deliberations at FOMC meetings,” seems clear enough to me.  I think it’s reasonable to consider having another staff person at these meetings, which seems like a good check.  Beyond that, I guess I’m willing to be led by others’ judgments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with Governor Yellen's statement and admits that they are unsure about what the formal policy should consist of.


Passage number 376.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 377.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And thanks to the subcommittee—I really do appreciate the work you’ve done on this.  When these questions were circulated, it triggered my memory, so I went back and looked at FRAM, and I think it may have the essence of what we need.  It’s a matter of what you want to formalize, because right now these are voluntary guidelines.  In paragraph 5 of FRAM it says senior officials “should strictly preserve the confidentiality of System information that, if revealed, could benefit any person or impair the effectiveness of System operations and policies.”  I think formalizing that would put us all on notice.  The next one involves considering invitations to speak at meetings sponsored by profit-making organizations.  “Such officials should carefully weigh the public benefits likely to be derived…against the possibility that their participation might afford such organizations a prestige advantage over competitors.”  I think that’s a good guideline for us to continue to follow.  Paragraph 7 says, “In public speeches and relations with news media, senior officials should be particularly mindful of”—and I will shorten this part to “conflicts”—“and, in addition, should avoid statements that might suggest the nature of any monetary policy action that has not been officially disclosed or that might confuse or mislead the public with respect to the monetary or other policies of the System.”  And the last paragraph I will mention is senior officials “should feel free to express their personal views concerning questions of System or public interest, but they should carefully consider whether their remarks might create public misunderstanding of the System’s actions, or impair the effective formulation and implementation of System policies or lessen the prestige of the System.” So we have much of what we were talking about, and it’s a matter of formalizing the voluntary guidelines.  I would be in favor of formalizing them first. Another issue is whether we make this public, so that everyone knows we’re on notice.  I think this is something we ought to consider, because then it not only puts us on notice, but it also puts them on notice.  I think that pretty much reflects my comments relative to the questions.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and support for the guidelines mentioned in FRAM and suggests that they should be formalized and made public.


Passage number 378.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the title of President Rosengren but does not provide any information about any contention or disagreement related to their role or actions.


Passage number 379.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I am on the subcommittee and I asked to go towards the end, and number 3 was towards the end.  [Laughter]  The subcommittee had to wrestle with wanting to make sure that there wasn’t undue access that provided the appearance of financial gain, and trading that off against the need to understand developments in the economy and financial markets.  So it’s really important to find the right balance.  I would highlight that, to the extent that we formalize things, the rules have to be clear and enforceable. Let me start with the second issue, which refers to the potential limitations.  I actually do think that FOMC meetings should be kept confidential other than what’s in the minutes, which provide the public recounting, so that we basically shouldn’t be talking about these meetings to anybody in public or in private. In terms of meetings with individual financial market participants, I have already instituted the practice of having somebody else in the room with me.  It can be the head of our supervision division, the head of the research division, or a communications officer, and the reason is to make sure that absolutely nothing is being conveyed that’s not already in the public domain.  And I have become much more careful about footnoting speeches that I’ve previously given to make it clear that it is already in the public domain, so that nothing being conveyed in our discussion is different from what has already been said publicly either by me or provided in the FOMC minutes.  I think those are all important things to think about.  I am in favor of them.  I’ve already implemented them. In terms of the limitations to access, I do think some of it’s the frequency.  If the same person who potentially is closely monitoring the Fed is regularly meeting with you, even if nothing is conveyed during those meetings, I think the appearance of very, very regular meetings potentially is a problem.  So I’ve also changed my practice in that respect—even with somebody else in the room, I have tried to make sure that I don’t meet with the kind of regularity that would in any way provide an appearance of undue access to any one individual or organization. In terms of centralized reporting, I think that could become very cumbersome.  I’m actually not opposed to it, but I have talked to some others who are less comfortable with it.  The one area where it might be useful to report press contacts centrally is if it’s only to one individual news organization, or one individual reporter, just so that, if there is a leak, there will already be a record within the organization that highlights whom you talk to and when.  I wouldn’t expect that it would be necessary, but it would provide a way to make sure we could quickly refer to people’s logs and know who talked to what reporter when. In terms of interactions at conferences, I don’t think we want to limit that.  I think it is important to have social interactions.  And when it is in a group setting or when press is there, it is very unlikely to result in a problem.  So I think that either at conferences or when media are present, then I wouldn’t really be too concerned about who else is in the room.  And I certainly think that we should not speak to forums where there are only clients of an individual firm.  That definitely gives an appearance that you are giving financial gain to one organization.  So there have to be multiple organizations before I would be willing to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily focused on the speaker's own views and actions regarding access and communication with financial market participants.


Passage number 380.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "Governor Tarullo" but does not provide any information about any disagreements or cont


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 381.
 MR. TARULLO.  Can I just ask Eric to clarify something.  Did I draw the correct inference that you regard this as governing discussions with members of the general media, as well as people whose purpose is to generate direct or indirect trading profits from predicting monetary policy actions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is seeking clarification from Eric about his understanding of the statement regarding discussions with members of the general media and individuals seeking to predict monetary policy actions for trading profits.


Passage number 382.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I think the questions were focused on the individuals that can directly get financial gain, but I think that we should think about how it should apply potentially to reporters as well.  That’s my own personal view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rosengren is expressing his own personal viewpoint about potentially extending the application of certain questions to reporters.


Passage number 383.
 MR. TARULLO.  Could you explain that.  My assumption had been that the reason we were not including talking to reporters here is because we had a shared view that whenever the reporter used whatever he or she got, it was immediately available to the world on the web.  But maybe I’m missing something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is seeking clarification and expressing uncertainty about his assumption.


Passage number 384.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  No.  In terms of financial gain, if I only talk to one Wall Street Journal reporter every other month, and I didn’t talk to a New York Times reporter or a Fox News reporter or a Bloomberg reporter, I think that would give an appearance of supporting one news organization over other news organizations.  So I do think that we have to be careful, to some degree, to spread our access to the press around, just as we spread our access to potentially interested financial parties around.  But that’s my own personal view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal view on the need to spread access to the press and financial parties, but there is no conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 385.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 386.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the passage only mentions the name "President Bullard" without providing any additional information or context to suggest any form of disagreement or contention. It is simply a statement without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 387.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the subcommittee for doing all of the fine work on this.  I have to agree with President Hoenig.  My experience being around the Fed was that I thought we were already doing most of this, and I thought there was a code.  So maybe it’s a matter of reviewing that code. I’m going to make some general comments that may go in a different direction.  My view is that our discussions of communication tend to be very negative and very risk averse—in fact, I would say they exhibit extreme forms of risk aversion.  There is too much worry that something might be said to someone that might be inappropriate—and certainly we need to worry about that—but that should not be the primary concern of our communication policy.  Our communication policy should be a positive statement of what we are trying to accomplish with communications, and we should think in terms of broad strategic communication policy from this Committee.  Ideally, I would go so far as to adopt metrics about whether or not we are accomplishing our goals through our communication policy.  I think the general judgment over the last three years is probably that we are not accomplishing what we want to accomplish as a Committee. My feeling is that our existing strategy has too often allowed others to define the Fed and to define this Committee, and we need to have strategies and ideas about how to get our ideas out there.  To put everything in a narrow framework about whether somebody will make a misstep at some point is not helping that.  I think that, because we have this view, and it is a longstanding view around the Fed, it has allowed public relations problems and misinformation to fester, and I am very worried that this might do lasting damage to the institution. I do not think that rules can be written that encompass every situation in which we might find ourselves, and I also think that anyone we talk to, in principle, could profit from anything that we say.  So I don’t think you can have a prescriptive thing that maps out every single situation.  I don’t think that’s a good way to go. One general policy would be to convey the same messages in all forums and never reveal confidential information about what is going on in the Committee itself.  I think pretty much everybody adheres to that.  In general, I think that active engagement with all audiences should be encouraged.  That should be something that we are trying to do and trying to get done.  By “all audiences,” I mean financial markets, business leaders, the general public, and, in fact, I would greatly expand our contacts.  I would try to think about whether we’re doing enough and whether we’re communicating with certain audiences.  Obviously, we’re missing certain groups of people, and they’re going off and developing their own ideas about what we’re about and what we’re doing.  To put limits on that is going to impair our ability to get messages across and may damage the institution. So I would prefer a positive statement that emphasizes engagement with all audiences.  We certainly do not want people to profit from what we’re doing, but, in some sense, any time you utter a word, I suppose somebody can trade on it.  I would, however, dispute the claim that you can trade successfully on very much of what anybody says around here—I certainly think not, but maybe people think that they can.  We’re giving our own views about where we think policy should go, but each of us is just one voice on a big Committee.  Certainly, the Chairman is different.  The Chairman has a huge megaphone, but the Chairman’s interactions are more prescribed, probably, than are those of the rest of us. Also, many of us talk to a variety of councils that come into the Banks.  Are we going to say that that guy on the council might turn around and profit.  I think this is just a very difficult thing.  So you have to follow this code where you say, “I’m giving you my own positions.”  I say the same things all the time.  I have the same messages all the time.  And I’m happy to try to communicate those messages.  But I don’t think that you can prescribe that such-and-such situation is out of bounds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The author is expressing disagreement with the current communication policy of the Fed and believes that it is too risk-averse and negative. They argue that the focus should be on positive communication and engaging with all audiences, rather than worrying about potential missteps. They also disagree with the idea of prescribing specific situations that are off-limits for communication.


Passage number 388.
 MS. YELLEN.  Could I just ask a follow-up question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple request for a follow-up question.


Passage number 389.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "sure" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply an affirmation or agreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 390.
 MS. YELLEN.  Do you think it would be okay to talk to the clients of a financial firm behind closed doors about your personal views on monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage indicates a potential disagreement or contention, as it brings up the question of whether it is acceptable for an individual to discuss personal views on monetary policy with clients of a financial firm in a confidential or private setting. Different opinions or perspectives on this matter may exist.


Passage number 391.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, like everything else, I think it’s a judgment that has to be made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing his opinion that a judgment needs to be made, but there is no opposing view stated.


Passage number 392.
 MS. YELLEN.  They could be benefitting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 393.
 MR. BULLARD.  It’s possible that the audience is so large—I did one that was 400 people, and it was basically the whole financial community in the town.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the size of the audience at a particular event.


Passage number 394.
 MS. YELLEN.  Well, suppose the sponsor is a financial firm, and the firm has arranged a conference for clients, and you’re asked to be the speaker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no indication of any contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply describes a hypothetical scenario without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints being discussed.


Passage number 395.
 MR. BULLARD.  In that case, you could insist that members of the public be allowed.  Or, if media are there, then your comments are going to get reported anyway.  Also, we put our speeches and the Q&A on the web after the event.  So, given that, are you imparting special information to a select group.  I don’t really think so.  Are you giving the same messages you always give.  Do you want to communicate with this group.  Yes, you probably want to get certain messages across to this group.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only presents a series of statements and questions about whether members of the public should be allowed to attend an event and whether special information is being shared with a select group.


Passage number 396.
 MS. YELLEN.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any explicit indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement or acknowledgement.


Passage number 397.
 MR. EVANS.  Jim has got a good point.  I’m not quite sure how to define this.  There must be financial industry councils that the New York Fed or other Reserve Banks have, and you talk to them, maybe with more Fed people there.  But if it’s not open to the public, I’m not quite sure exactly how that’s different from the private meeting with a financial firm’s clients.  I think a little more definition of the examples that we’re contemplating would be very, very helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is expressing his uncertainty and asking for clarification rather than disagreeing with anyone else's statement.


Passage number 398.
 MS. YELLEN.  An example is that Merrill Lynch asks you to come to a client conference where you will be the main speaker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Merrill Lynch has requested the presence of someone (presumably the person being referred to as "you") to be the main speaker at a client conference.


Passage number 399.
 MR. EVANS.  I’ve never done that, but I think there are probably some examples that we all have shared where there might have been a dinner that felt a little uncomfortable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is expressing a personal opinion and suggesting that there might be shared experiences of uncomfortable dinners.


Passage number 400.
 MS. YELLEN.  I know exactly what you’re talking about, and I would regard that, after having contemplated it, as something we absolutely shouldn’t do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states that MS. YELLEN understands the issue being discussed and expresses her opinion that it should not be done.


Passage number 401.
 MR. PLOSSER.  But suppose it was a conference and, as Jim said, there were 300 or 400 people there, and the press was there.  Would it matter.  If the press was there, which essentially makes it public, you would probably write your speech for that conference just as you would write any other speech.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a hypothetical scenario being discussed.


Passage number 402.
  MR. FISHER.  But imagine this news article:  “Charles Plosser met today with selected clients of Goldman Sachs and said the following.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario involving a meeting between Charles Plosser and selected clients of Goldman Sachs.


Passage number 403.
” MR. PLOSSER.  I’m asking a question.  I wasn’t trying to propose an answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser simply states that he is asking a question and not proposing an answer.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 404.
 MR. FISHER.  You asked for an example.  It seems to me that the optics there would not be good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, suggests that the optics (the appearance or perception) of the example mentioned would not be positive, implying disagreement with the suggestion given.


Passage number 405.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay, but we do something much worse than that—we meet with Goldman Sachs in private right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that they meet with Goldman Sachs in private.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 406.
 MR. FISHER.  I don’t.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, has a different opinion or perspective on something that is not explicitly mentioned in the given excerpt.


Passage number 407.
 MR. BULLARD.  I think we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 408.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, what about talking to 30 CEOs before every FOMC meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about the idea of talking to 30 CEOs before every FOMC meeting without expressing any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 409.
 MR. FISHER.  I’ll tell you how I do that, because that’s important.  The ground rules are that I will impart no information, and I will only listen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 410.
 MR. EVANS.  Oh, you don’t have a conversation with them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a statement from Mr. Evans.


Passage number 411.
 MR. FISHER.  And they’re not financial firms.  I do not impart a thing, including my own views.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that Mr. Fisher does not impart any information, including his own views. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in this statement.


Passage number 412.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, you could talk to financial firms, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests a possible course of action - talking to financial firms.


Passage number 413.
 MR. FISHER.  And if Toys R Us can make a profit off of my interaction, that would be something.  But we have very strict rules.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing the hope that Toys R Us can benefit from their interaction, but also mentioning the presence of strict rules. This statement does not indicate any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 414.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Lockhart, would you like to enter into the conversation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply asking President Lockhart if they would like to join the conversation.


Passage number 415.
 MR. FISHER.  I do think, though, that we have to think about the optics here as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and there is no clear disagreement or contention present in this statement.


Passage number 416.
 MR. LOCKHART.  First, let me say thanks to Tom for pointing out FRAM—I think it’s a good foundation.  Over and above that, I really favor an informal set of guidelines and principles that puts the emphasis on exercising good judgment and taking perhaps greater care going forward.  I think strict limitations on contacts who might—I emphasize the conditional—generate trading or positioning profits is unworkably broad and, certainly, in my case, might interfere with the usefulness of many contacts.  Likewise, defining a strict frequency limit or rule, I think, goes too far. I don’t favor centralized reporting, but I do think it’s reasonable to assume that each participant will maintain a record of meetings and contacts.  And I do favor some tightening of elements of the guidelines.  For example, meetings with most parties, and certainly those with the press, should include, if possible, a public information officer as an associate or someone from the research department—a witness, if you will.  I think events in which businesses, clients, and prospects are the exclusive invitees, should be avoided or discouraged, even if the media are present, because I don’t think that changes the appearance of privileged access. I think participants should refrain from characterizing FOMC deliberations before the publication of the minutes, and then, after the minutes are out, they should characterize FOMC meetings in a manner consistent with the minutes.  And, of course, I think we all agree that we should adhere to a defined blackout period. That’s something I think should be strictly defined. On the question of expressing personal views on monetary policy that have not been stated publicly, again, I think this goes a little too far and should be left to judgment.  I accept the spirit of this guideline, because it does suggest privileged access to insider views. And, finally, if guidelines and principles are adopted by this group, I think they should be made public.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Lockhart is expressing his opinions and preferences on various guidelines and principles, but there is no indication of any disagreement or argument between him and others.


Passage number 417.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 418.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My views are a lot like Jim’s.  I think part of what makes policy good is transparency, and the more transparent we can be, the better off we would be in general.  Policies that are controlling can backfire on us.  Tom’s point about FRAM indicates that there are already guidelines in place about what we should and shouldn’t do.  I don’t think we can legislate good judgment here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement with Jim's views on transparency in policy-making and acknowledges the existing guidelines in place. There is no opposition or disagreement presented.


Passage number 419.
 I would note that this mostly refers to FOMC participants, not staff, whereas the guidelines in FRAM suggest senior officials— MS. YELLEN.  It’s our intention to develop corresponding guidelines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying that the guidelines being discussed refer to FOMC participants rather than staff, and that they intend to develop similar guidelines for senior officials.


Passage number 420.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’m not accusing anybody, but staff contacts with the private sector and the media can also create these kinds of issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Plosser, explicitly states that he is not accusing anybody. He is discussing the potential for issues that can arise from staff contacts with the private sector and the media. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 421.
  MS. YELLEN.  We intend to address that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their intention to address a certain issue.


Passage number 422.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I think one of the things that oftentimes gets us into trouble or misunderstood is when we go off the record.  My impression is that the Board, for example, gives very few on-the-record interviews, and, instead, the discussion is oftentimes on background.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing an observation about the Board's tendency to give few on-the-record interviews.


Passage number 423.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Charlie, are you talking about contacts with the media at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It simply asks a question about contacts with the media.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 424.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’m talking about the media or some people who are Fed watchers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Plosser is suggesting that there is contention or disagreement with "the media or some people who are Fed watchers." This is indicated by his statement that he is "talking about" them, implying a difference of opinion or interpretation.


Passage number 425.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 426.
 MR. PLOSSER.  My own personal approach is never to say anything to anybody that I wouldn’t say publicly or haven’t said publicly, for example, in a speech.  I think there are lots of gray areas here.  I agree that it would not look good for one of us to speak at a Goldman Sachs venue, but, at the same time, all of us, I suspect, have spoken at banking conventions sponsored by a not-for-profit organization, such as the American Bankers Association, but basically the attendees include clients and donors and funders.  Is that acceptable, whereas something else may not be.  Or what about a university event, where alumni are raising money to support the institution.  There are lots of cases where it begins to get a little fuzzy, so I’m leery of trying to legislate that kind of controlling policy.   I want to encourage communication.  I want to have more communication, not less, and have more open communication and less behind-the-scenes communication.  I think enforcement is going to be really, really difficult, and, again, I think we just can’t legislate good judgment.  I would prefer that we adopt broader guidelines that apply to everybody and then trust that we will use our best judgment, rather than adopt an attitude where we sow seeds of suspicion by trying to control behavior tightly.  That’s just my general philosophy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, expresses his personal approach of being open and transparent in his communication, while also acknowledging the gray areas and potential conflicts of interest that arise in certain speaking engagements. He questions the need for strict regulations and instead suggests adopting broader guidelines and trusting individuals to use their best judgment. This implies a disagreement with the idea of imposing tight control over behavior and sowing seeds of suspicion.


Passage number 427.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" followed by "First Vice President Moore" appears to indicate gratitude towards or acknowledgment of First Vice President Moore.


Passage number 428.
 MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t have much specific to offer here.  I would just make the observation that I think the Federal Reserve System is perceived as being very cozy with the financial sector, and very distant from the general public.  And, in that context, I think anything we can do to suggest less coziness with the former and closer proximity to the latter, would serve us well.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Moore is providing his observation that the Federal Reserve System is perceived as being cozy with the financial sector and distant from the general public. He suggests that the Fed should strive to have less coziness with the financial sector and be closer to the general public. There is no disagreement or conflict expressed in this statement.


Passage number 429.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Pianalto.


Passage number 430.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also want to thank the subcommittee for their work on this important issue.  As I was developing my answers to the questions, I found myself gravitating to the second issue, which is the potential limitation on content.  By limiting what we communicate to information that’s already available to the public, we greatly minimize the actual or perceived problems associated with individuals who stand to gain financially from their interactions with us. There is an analogy in the private sector to this—the SEC’s fair disclosure rule.  That rule prohibits the selective disclosure of material and non-public information to selected persons, such as securities analysts or institutional investors, before that information is disclosed to the general public.  The regulation requires that, when material information is intentionally disclosed, it be disclosed publicly and not selectively.  That line of thinking helped me answer some of the questions. In question 2A in the subcommittee’s memo regarding content, I think the strict adherence to the Program for Security of FOMC Information that we approved yesterday is essential.  That means not sharing the views of others, or even characterizing the FOMC conversations, and letting the minutes provide the summary. In question 2B, I also don’t think that anyone should have non-public information, even about a Committee member’s own views.  Our own views would have to be presented publicly before they are given to any individual. Regarding question 1 on access, I think that FOMC participants should strive, as others have said, to avoid being in situations where it might appear that we’re giving confidential information or information that isn’t available to others.  That means paying close attention to the venues that we select, as we’ve been discussing, as well as to the frequency of questionable contacts, so that, again, we avoid the appearance of any favoritism. Finally, regarding whether this should be informal or formal, I agree with Governor Yellen that it should be formal, and I think that sharing it with the public will help us respond to requests and help us explain why we aren’t accepting some of the requests.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, expresses agreement with the subcommittee's work and shares her views on the potential limitation on content and access to information. She also agrees with Governor Yellen that the process should be formal and shared with the public.


Passage number 431.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you" is a polite expression of gratitude and does not imply any conflict or disagreement. The mention of "President Evans" also does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 432.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank the subcommittee for putting in a lot of hard work on a very difficult subject.  I did write a fairly detailed response to the subcommittee, so anything that’s in that response but that I don’t bring up in this discussion still applies.  I also appreciate the perspective that Tom brought to bear from FRAM.  That accords pretty well with what I would have hoped that we already had in place, so I agree with that. At times, I’ve thought that the reason we sometimes see questionable things from Fed staff in the newspaper could be that there is just not sufficient training for all of the staff and that we aren’t always very clear about what the security guidelines mean.  I know that, for information security and ethics training and so on, we have online guides and even certification exercises, so maybe we could do something like that every year on this issue.  At any rate, I think that training could help, and FRAM is already on point on a lot of the issues. I agree with Jim and Charlie and others in thinking that we need to communicate a lot more.  I think we’ve been undertaking very difficult monetary policies that are hard to explain.  During a very difficult period, they’re susceptible to being picked apart, fairly and unfairly.  We need to make sure we have a policy in place that allows us to go out and explain, as best we all can, what we’re trying to accomplish and why it’s the right policy.  So, if we go down a particular path that ends up putting a lot of restrictions on how we’re supposed to talk, and so on, it will work against enhanced communication. As Charlie Plosser said, it’s really hard to legislate good judgment, so we’re counting on everybody to use their best judgment.  I’m not optimistic that we’re going to be very successful if we try to write the guidelines down in a legalistic fashion.  I think we need access to the kinds of parties, such as the financial sector, whom we’re concerned about.  I agree that talking to a closed meeting of financial clients is inappropriate, and we need to be careful about that.  But when I talk to people in the financial sector, if I ask the right questions and know what to probe for, I come away with something pretty useful for what we’re doing.  I don’t think it’s enough to count on New York and the Board of Governors to have a monopoly on that information without our having our own independent perspective.  So we need to figure out how to do that. I think having more examples of the bad choices would be helpful.  At the moment, I’ve just got a bunch of straw men on my list, and I don’t know if I should be very upset because it’s so proscriptive, or if instead I completely agree about talking or not talking to that particular group.  I guess we don’t really want to name the particular individual who might be responsible for a lot of this whole discussion.  Is it bad that we talk to certain people quite often.  I felt uncomfortable after I saw something that this person distributed to his clients, and I stopped agreeing to do that type of phone call for quite some time—even without the rules.  Sometimes financial groups have invited me to speak and, to assure me that it’s appropriate for a Fed official to do this, they’ve said, “Don Kohn came and talked to us.”  I know Don has good judgment about these things.  I know that he also knows how to talk to people and not say things he shouldn’t say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the perspectives and suggestions of others and is discussing the need for enhanced communication and independent perspective in the financial sector.


Passage number 433.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  He did it for 40 years, Charlie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone did something for 40 years, followed by laughter.


Passage number 434.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes, that’s exactly it.  Don once told me, “The minutes come out tomorrow.  I always read the minutes very carefully, because that reminds me of the language in which we talk about various things.”  Do the rest of us do that before we talk to a group.  I know I don’t.  I think The Wall Street Journal is particularly effective at getting certain messages out, so we need to be careful about how restrictive we might be—I can talk to a whole bunch of people and not get any press. I think informal guidelines would be better than strict ones, and I, personally, speak openly anyway when I talk to people.  So I don’t think I am giving different messages to different people.  I just say what I want.  If I thought that the rules were pretty proscriptive and difficult, I might be tempted to regularly post my observations on how I thought things were going and have it in a nice place on a website.  That may or may not be in line with what you are actually trying to get across, but it would be in the spirit of communicating very openly to everybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and perspectives on the topic without directly contradicting or challenging any external viewpoints.


Passage number 435.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  In 140 characters or fewer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Kocherlakota's request for a concise response within a certain character limit.


Passage number 436.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of the word "laughter" and the name "President Lacker," without any statements or indicators of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 437.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to thank the subcommittee for putting in time and effort and good thinking to help us on this.  I strongly support an effort to come to a mutual understanding about the standards of integrity we expect of each other, and I think that’s really worth doing. I’ve been wrestling with this since the subcommittee sent out materials for us to review.  I thought I had a grip on a number of principles, but I realized I hadn’t thought deeply about what they’re grounded on.  I think it’s difficult to draw bright lines, and that’s what I am struck with in reading what you have distributed.  Let me take this phrase as an example:  “individuals whose purpose may be to generate direct or indirect trading profits.”  I’m often at receptions around the District, where I talk to people who are members of the public.  As someone else remarked, virtually any of them could have a portfolio on which they could make a decision that might reflect what they thought they gleaned from what I said.  I think we all know what we’re trying to capture—the Macroeconomic Advisers of the world—but the net is drawn too loosely. The other issue is predicting monetary policy, and that stuck in my head for a bit, because, if you look at this from a broader perspective, we’ve been on a three-decade journey towards greater transparency, towards fuller communication.  I think we talk a lot more about our individual views than we used to.  I haven’t gone back and compared speeches, but my general sense is that, over the last 20 years, members of the FOMC—Governors and Presidents—say more in public about their own views than they used to.  We used to be much more guarded.  Central banks around the world over the last 20 or 30 years have become much more forthcoming, and I think there’s a really good reason for that.  I think that we all understand that we are more effective the more the public understands about how and why we do things.  We want people to understand our reaction function, so, in some sense, we want people to be able to predict monetary policy.  That creates an inevitable tension.  Obviously, if markets expect a move of 25 basis points, and somebody tips them off that it’s going to be 50, that’s a problem.  But, explaining macroeconomics to somebody presumably doesn’t prejudice a decision and helps what we’re doing going forward.  Between those two poles there’s going to be some fuzziness; for example, the elements of macroeconomics that you choose to enlighten people about can convey information about your views—in fact, this is a time-honored Fed communication practice that we use to hint about one thing or another. This is a hard issue to resolve, and it draws me strongly to the idea of dealing with it in terms of principles rather than prescriptive, detailed, legalistic rules.  Along the same lines, I think that centralized reporting is going to absorb a lot of time and effort on a small fraction of cases that are sort of blurry; for example, people will be spending time trying to figure whether they should report something or not, and it’s not likely to be worth the effort.  I think what we’re going for should be a mutual understanding of the general principles involved, which are selectivity of access and inappropriate disclosure, or the perception of those two things. I think what President Bullard said is really important.  Imagine that we adopt a formal policy on communications.  Imagine that it’s also secret.  So we adopt a secret policy on communication—well, that doesn’t seem right.  I think we’re going to be drawn towards releasing our policy.  And I think President Bullard is right that we want to frame it in the broad context of the value we see of communicating to American citizens.  I also think First Vice President Moore is right that we’re perceived as cozy with Wall Street when the reality is that we spend a ton of time with the citizens around our Districts. In sum, I think it would be useful to have that come through in a statement of what we think our communication is about, and how we do it with integrity.  I would urge the subcommittee to think about it from both the positive side and the negative side and try to craft a philosophical statement that starts things off and says something like, “Yes, communicating to the public is important, because they need to understand what we do, why we do it, how we do it, what goes into our thinking,” and so on.  Then, “At the same time, there are some things we need to keep confidential for the integrity of the process.  Here is how we constrain that.”  But put that as part of a broader, more positive message about communication.  These are my initial thoughts on this, and, at this time, it is all I have to offer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the net is drawn too loosely when it comes to defining individuals whose purpose may be to generate direct or indirect trading profits. They also mention the need for a broader, more positive message about communication, suggesting that the current approach may not be effective.


Passage number 438.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement present in the given passage. The passage only mentions "President Fisher" without any context or information that would indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 439.
 MR. FISHER.  Unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, I have to leave, because I’m giving a speech tomorrow morning to the Armstrong Dad’s Club at a local elementary school—it’s not about monetary policy.  [Laughter]  I apologize for not being able to stay.  I do think this is a very good suggestion.  We have talked about this.  I don’t want to talk too much because I’m on the subcommittee, but we should frame it in the positive sense that President Bullard and others mentioned, that we’re attempting to communicate more broadly.  I think John hit the nail on the head—we’re viewed as being too cozy with Wall Street and too opaque to the public.  If we phrase it that way, we can also point out some things that we do not do, such as provide inside information to unnamed former Governors who are consultants, so that they can make a profit.  I think we could emphasize that within a positive context. I think President Lacker is right that having very bright lines is extremely difficult.  I think good judgment, in the end, is what is required.  What we are really talking about here is reaffirming an ethic that makes us an exceptional institution.  There are some bright lines, however; for example, Sandy referred to the SEC fair disclosure rule.  I’m also sympathetic to broadening the group, as Charlie said, because it’s not just principals at this table but also the staff that have access to inside information, and we have to be very careful not to allow anybody to trade on it. But the general principle that has been expressed here, which is fairly new for our subcommittee to hear, is to put it in a positive context.  Our job is to communicate as broadly as possible, to inform the public, and not to have certain subsets of the public have privileged information from which they either might profit or it might be interpreted that they are benefiting at the expense of others.  If I may be excused, I would be grateful.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is mainly a statement of agreement and support for the idea of communicating more broadly and transparently. There is also a mention of the difficulty in setting "bright lines" and the need for good judgment. Overall, the tone is cooperative and supportive.


Passage number 440.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Have a good flight.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage consists of a polite greeting and farewell, followed by the title of "Vice Chairman." There is no indication of any contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 441.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I agree with Jeff on the communications.  We don’t want to make it look like we are trying to clamp everything down.  In fact, we want to frame it so that we’re actually opening things up and communicating to people in a fair, transparent way, so that everyone has equal access to the information. It seems to me there are two broad guidelines that we’re trying to conform to.  One is not to communicate material, non-public information to privileged parties; we want to avoid that at all costs.  Included in that material, non-public information would be, of course, any talk about what happened at the FOMC meeting, because that is material and it is non-public; for example, one wouldn’t talk about what someone said at the FOMC meeting.  I don’t know that we have to define each of those little pieces, and, instead, if we use the category “material, non-public information,” I think we all know what that is and can make judgments about that. The second broad guideline is a bit more difficult—we shouldn’t participate in any forum or meeting that provides a commercial benefit to that party.  This is particularly relevant to accepting speaking engagements.  Therefore, for example, I shouldn’t go speak at Goldman Sachs and talk to their clients.  And I would never do this in a million years, believe me, and the reason is that Goldman Sachs benefits from that.  I’ll give you an example of how far this can go.  I had a phone call from someone that used to be my boss who wanted me to give him a reference to another financial firm, and I refused, because I felt that if I gave him a positive reference, which he probably deserved, I was generating a commercial advantage for that person.  So we don’t want to do anything that provides a commercial advantage to a party. Now, the reason why this gets tricky is that it’s hard to say where it ends.  Speaking at a financial firm for its clients is obviously out.  Speaking at an advisory firm for its clients or that is going to use the information somehow, is obviously out.  But how about a university.  I gave the commencement address at New College.  Well, it’s probably beneficial to New College to have me as their commencement speaker, and that is probably creating some commercial advantage to them.  So does that mean I can’t be the commencement speaker at New College.  Here’s another tricky example.  Let’s say you’re going to meet with the board of directors of one of the banks in your District.  Well, it’s good for that firm to have that contact—it probably makes the board of directors feel better about being on that bank’s board.  I think that’s probably okay, but there’s a gradation of cases, and I think it’s very hard to draw the line precisely at the point where the commercial advantage is significant enough that it’s out of bounds.  One that’s clearly out of bounds is talking to a firm that’s a Fed watcher—that person you spoke to is going to take that information and sell it for profit. I think the principle is clear, but exactly how far down you go is a little bit more difficult.  Maybe we can specify examples that are very clearly out of bounds, specify gray areas, and then specify some things that we think are acceptable, say, doing a speech for a nonprofit organization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It is mostly a discussion of guidelines and examples related to communication and speaking engagements.


Passage number 442.
 MR. LACKER.  A trade organization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The given passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions. It simply introduces Mr. Lacker as a member of a trade organization.


Passage number 443.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Trade organizations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "trade organizations" does not provide any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement. Without further information, it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement surrounding trade organizations.


Passage number 444.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  A fundraiser for a nonprofit would be okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that a fundraiser for a nonprofit organization would be acceptable or permissible.


Passage number 445.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, that’s an interesting question—for a university, for example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the question asked is interesting and giving an example (a university) to illustrate why it is interesting.


Passage number 446.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  If the organizer invites only wealthy alumni from a university for the sole purpose of raising the endowment of that university, do you think that would be okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply asks for an opinion regarding a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 447.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don’t know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no way to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or text provided.


Passage number 448.
 MR. LACKER.  How is that different from a Chamber of Commerce.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for a clarification or explanation of a difference.


Passage number 449.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Remember that you’re not disclosing material, non-public information.  There are two separate things here.  But I think this is tricky.  I think the education one is the particular one that we need to spend a little bit of attention on. Let me just make a few other points.  I actually am in favor of reporting all meetings.  I think this is just a transparency thing.  If you don’t report them, then people are always going to be suspicious of whom you’re meeting with, and if we’re all doing the right thing and meeting with the right people, then we shouldn’t be embarrassed by whom we’re meeting with.  I just don’t think it’s that big a deal to report it. I think it’s useful, as others have said, to have a third party in attendance when possible, be it someone from research, communications, or the executive office.  That provides protection if you ever get into a “he said, she said” situation, because the third party can actually repudiate what the person reported you said if you didn’t actually say it. I would prefer to have a formal policy, even though the formal policy may just be these high-level principles.  It seems to me that we want to have something written down.  I’d much rather tell the Congress that I have a formal policy than an informal policy.  How could I justify saying, “Oh, we just have an informal policy about how we communicate”.  I think that would be hard to defend. Finally, on the staff issue, this is a red herring, in my opinion.  Speaking for the New York Fed, we went through the crisis for years and dealt with all sorts of special stuff.  As far as I’m concerned, nothing ever leaked from anybody.  So I don’t think it’s a staff issue.  I really think that’s off point.  I think it is about us, how we behave, how we talk.  I don’t think the staff is the problem.  I really, really don’t.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is generally expressing agreement with the idea of reporting all meetings and having a formal policy for communication. They also express their belief that the staff is not the problem.


Passage number 450.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I just add to your point on the formal versus the informal policy.  I don’t think it’s as easy as just sort of saying, “I call it formal.  You call it informal.”  I can imagine somebody saying, “Well, a formal policy is one where there’s some kind of audit trail, where there’s some check against what you’re actually doing.”  And I think that’s where we would trip up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. EVANS is simply elaborating on the point about the distinction between formal and informal policies.


Passage number 451.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  A written record of whom you met with would be part of that formal process, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is questioning whether a written record of meeting attendees is included in a formal process.


Passage number 452.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, okay.  But, if it ends up being something that is an audit trail like our internal audit or something like that, then it’s going to take on a very different nature, and I think we’ll end up tripping over the little things.  It’s one of the things auditors do—they say, “Here’s a list of what you say you do, and here’s what you actually did, so you missed on a bunch of things.”  That could be embarrassing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a potential scenario and expressing their concern about the consequences of it. There is no conflicting viewpoint present.


Passage number 453.
 MS. YELLEN.  Well, it seems to me that a formal policy could be a statement of ethical principles, possibly couched in the positive way that you and Jim and Jeff and others have proposed.  It could be a clear statement of what one’s ethical obligations are.  Obviously, there are gray areas when it comes to specifics.  But the idea is that, even though it’s not quite enforceable, a positive answer to the question “Do you adhere to high ethical standards” is not voluntary, it’s obligatory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement from Ms. Yellen discussing the potential content and nature of a formal policy on ethical principles. The passage is focused on defining what the policy could include, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 454.
 MR. BULLARD.  I had one comment on Vice Chairman Dudley’s remarks.  I thought that the most out of bounds thing that you could do is to talk to a board of directors, especially of a financial institution.  I was taught in the Fed that that was the most out of bounds.  And you, in contrast, have the idea that, if that same bank has its clients in with a big group, that’s what’s out of bounds.  I think that difference shows how murky this is.  When you talk to the bank directors, you’re going right into the bank, and that could be perceived as giving inside information directly to the financial institution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: Mr. Bullard believes that talking to a board of directors of a financial institution is the most out of bounds action, while the speaker being addressed has the opposite belief, considering it out of bounds to discuss with clients in a big group. This difference of opinion shows a disagreement on what is appropriate or acceptable behavior when it comes to sharing information with financial institutions.


Passage number 455.
 MR. LACKER.  The context is that our supervisory staff frequently meets with boards of directors of banks we supervise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between Mr. Lacker and anyone else involved. It simply states that supervisory staff frequently meets with boards of directors of banks they supervise.


Passage number 456.
 MR. BULLARD.  That’s different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that something is different.


Passage number 457.
 MR. LACKER.  Occasionally, these are large, prominent firms.  The Reserve Bank President is invited along.  There are times when I accompany my staff for a particularly important meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that there are occasions when the Reserve Bank President is invited along with the speaker's staff for important meetings.


Passage number 458.
 MS. YELLEN.  But for supervisory purposes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement by Ms. Yellen.


Passage number 459.
 MR. BULLARD.  To talk on supervisory matters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "to talk on supervisory matters" suggests a discussion or conversation on the topic, but it does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions.


Passage number 460.
 MR. LACKER.  Right, but it can happen that one is quizzed about macroeconomic information.  It hasn’t happened to me though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 461.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context. The mention of "Governor Warsh" alone does not provide enough information to make a judgment.


Passage number 462.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a few broad comments.  First, I view this subcommittee that Governor Yellen is heading as important and the successor to a long set of communications discussions.  I don’t view the discussion that we’re having or should be having as the “gotcha” committee because of particular ill things that we’re trying to root out.  If that comes out of a broader discussion of how we best communicate and what things are to be avoided, that’s fine, but I don’t think that this should be reflected as somehow catching bad guys, and that’s what is occupying our time. Second, I favor constitutions, not penal codes.  I think the penal code concept suggests somehow that there has been a grievous breach in decorum, respect, comity, civility.  I haven’t seen any of that, even in the big fights we’ve had over LSAPs.  I think we run real risks to the integrity of this organization if we decide that we’re going to set up controls, audits, systems, processes, and procedures.  We would look a lot like other agencies and a lot less like the Federal Reserve a couple of years after that.  So put me in the camp of constitutions.  Constitutions aren’t something that people can disobey.  Constitutions matter.  They impact people’s behavior.  Views and interpretations of constitutions are important, but I think they’re very different from penal codes.  If you look at countries that start out with 10-page constitutions and then have thousands of pages—I’m thinking of particular countries in South America—you see republics that are breaking apart at the seams. Third, I think we’ve got different classes of counterparties, each of which demands a different set of judgments.  For example, regarding market participants, I agree with Charlie Evans that you can get a lot out of having a discussion with them, so it strikes me as a discussion that should be encouraged and not discouraged.  That doesn’t mean there shouldn’t be rules of the road.  Another class is the people who stand between us and the real world to communicate—I get nothing out of those discussions, though I see what they get.  As a result, I would bring different rules of the road to the frequency and necessity of those sorts of conversations.  Finally, there’s the press.  I think that’s a different discussion from the one we’ve been having and it should be thought of differently with different rules.  I don’t have any perfect solutions but I wouldn’t conflate the press with intermediaries who stand between us and financial markets. I have just two more.  Fourth, the Chairman is different from the rest of us.  And it strikes me that not only is this Chairman different, but Chairmen are different, and we should think about the discretion they might need, because their communication of policy is fundamentally different from that of Governors and Presidents.  As a result, I think we wouldn’t want to constrain the Chairman with rules, particularly at times of crisis. Fifth, I think Bill rightly brings up the point of material, non-public information.  Let me combine that with the discussion about the need to communicate more, to tell people more about what we think.  In my view, the world hears from a lot of us all the time, and there’s a big difference between the frequency of communication and their understanding of how we’re thinking about policy.  I don’t happen to share the view that more is always and everywhere better.  If I can only say to group X what I said in a public speech, then, for those of us who tend to speak less frequently, you feel compelled to get your evolving set of thoughts on the record on a monthly basis, otherwise you run afoul of the penal code.  I don’t think that that’s necessarily good.  I trust everyone around here to make his or her own judgments about how frequently they should speak, and I wouldn’t want to tie private comments to the most recent things that were said in the speech to the local Rotary.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a series of broad comments and opinions, but there is no clear disagreement or contention between the different viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 463.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 464.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you.  I have just a couple of thoughts, and going through this process has opened my eyes to how difficult it actually is.  First, a number of people have talked about judgment, and in information security or control mechanisms, there’s always the basic tenet that your overall security program is only as good as the weakest link.  In this situation, our reputation is only as good as the weakest judgment among us, so the judgment calls that each of us makes will affect the reputation of us collectively.  I think it’s important to keep that in mind and continue to discuss it. Second, I think one thing we really are trying to guard against is sort of “synthetic” confidential information.  We all understand what the actual confidential information is—the written materials, what’s said in this room, and so on.  But what about the things that each of us is thinking, the things we’re talking to each other about not in a formal FOMC meeting, and the opinions that we have.  By talking to each of us, somebody could create confidential information.  Given that, I do think we need some coordination mechanism to understand who’s talking to whom in order to avoid the appearance, if not the reality, of somebody being able to create synthetic information. Finally, there’s a tendency to think of this communication issue as covering conversations in formal settings, but, in reality, each of us is always an FOMC participant, and, just as Governor Raskin gets caught between the tabloids and the gum, I’ve been tackled in bars and I’ve been tackled on the beach [laughter] by people wanting me to explain what it is we’re doing.  If I felt that the only answer I could give them was something I had already said in a public setting or in a speech, I would have to start tweeting, I really would.  So I think we have to be careful about prohibiting saying anything that you haven’t said in public.  Doing so could create an awful lot of noise from things being said in public just so that they could then be said in private. Finally, I come down in favor of formal principles with some suggested guidelines that go along with them, and I think it does make sense for those to be positively framed rather than negatively framed.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements. It consists mostly of the speaker sharing their thoughts and suggestions on the topic of communication and confidentiality. There is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 465.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply acknowledges and shows gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 466.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My first point picks up on something that Kevin said and a couple of people echoed, but it was notably absent from the beginning of the go-round, and that point is that there are discrete issues here.  The one that I think is front and center is that of exclusivity of access, particularly exclusivity associated with profit and trading for profit.  The issue of communication seems to me a different one—related perhaps, but a much more difficult one—and, as you said, Jim, one that has more affirmative elements to it and not simply negative elements.  As you could tell from my earlier question to Eric, I, like Kevin, think the issues of the press are perhaps deserving of some conversation, but they’re separate, as well, in part precisely because if the press itself is acting ethically, exclusivity is not an issue.  They literally are speaking to the world whenever they repeat something that they have heard from one of us. My second point is a little hard to say, but I’m going to say it.  I disagree with Kevin on this notion that somehow the Federal Reserve is special and that the rules that apply to the rest of the government don’t apply to us.  I’ll be honest and say that’s one of the things that has concerned me about the Federal Reserve in the two years that I’ve been here.  I’ll begin with ethics.  There have been some things that I have seen—and, again, it’s hard to say this—particularly associated with some of the behaviors of some directors at Reserve Banks that just shouldn’t be allowed, and I think we need to formalize things considerably more than they have been formalized. The third point is that rules are hard.  Rulemaking is difficult because you always have under-inclusion and over-inclusion.  This is why rulemaking processes are not a straightforward exercise, and why rules are not always the best approach to take.  But, Charlie, precisely because one cannot legislate good judgment, there are times when one needs to legislate behavior.  I think there are circumstances in which the potential for over- and under-inclusion is sufficiently circumscribed that one may need something approaching a rule, even though, in a lot of other areas, principles and examples and guidelines are more appropriate mechanisms.  In a way, some of this discussion was like a first-year law class.  People state a position, and some people create a hypothetical that’s at the edge of that position to show how you can’t possibly have a rule.  Well, of course, you can have a rule, but you can’t necessarily cover everything with that rule.  Several people have been explicit about this, and I agree with them. The most disturbing thing right now is the phenomenon of someone who comes in, talks to most or all members of the FOMC and then to a group of paying clients, essentially advertising that fact and suggesting that there’s a special kind of information.  This is not limited to one person, and this is not just Macroeconomic Advisers, although they have been mentioned.  Way before I was at the Fed, I heard people going around town saying, “Oh, yeah, I have lunch with X and Y at the Fed, so I kind of know where they are, and this is where the Fed is heading on this.”  I think this problem is more serious than most of the people around the table think it is, and I have believed since I’ve been here that there was a real problem waiting to explode.  Now, we’ve had a lot of bad press, which has been about other things, but I really think there’s the potential for problems here.  And I have to say that it’s not just limited to, as I said, the Larry Meyer type of issue at all.  I think Larry is going to bear the brunt of a lot of this in some respects, but it really isn’t limited to him.  We’re not at the point of being able to write that rule, but that doesn’t mean we don’t need to be in favor of doing so.  I would add that I really think we need rules for the conduct of directors of Federal Reserve Banks.  I really do.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, disagrees with Kevin on the notion that the Federal Reserve is special and that the rules that apply to the rest of the government don't apply to them. He also disagrees on the need for rules for the conduct of directors of Federal Reserve Banks. There is a disagreement on the approach and rules that should be applied to the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 467.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Regarding what particular things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to analyze that information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 468.
 MR. TARULLO.  There have been meetings where people are formally here in their role as directors and they have attempted to lobby me on applications dealing with their institutions and/or pending regulatory issues.  In one case, even when I suggested to the individual that it was inappropriate, he persisted with my colleagues and attempted to come by my office the next morning.  I just think we need a code of conduct to prevent that sort of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, believes that there should be a code of conduct to prevent directors from lobbying on behalf of their institutions or pending regulatory issues. However, the individuals he mentions in the passage seem to be disregarding his suggestion and persisting with their lobbying efforts.


Passage number 469.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in this passage. It simply states the name "Governor Raskin" without providing any context or information about any potential disagreements.


Passage number 470.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to thank the members of the subcommittee on communications for helping to guide this discussion.  I have certainly learned a lot listening to everyone’s comments.  Certainly, the notion of having an overarching philosophical statement is a good one, so, in that spirit, I would offer the following.  In considering why central banks communicate with outside people, I start with the overarching principle that they do so to enhance transparency, and there are really two fundamental purposes in doing so.  First is accountability.  There’s enormous power inherent in a central bank, so the political process has the ongoing responsibility of evaluating whether our exercise of that power is meeting society’s goals.  In other words, the public has to have information to conduct an effective evaluation of our work.  The second reason we aim to enhance transparency is that we’re in the business here of managing expectations of inflation and of the future path of the policy rate.  In thinking about the second reason, which is essentially about the conduct of monetary policy, my evolving view is that we want to make sure that we remain accountable while at the same time we want to make sure that we are correctly managing expectations.  And we want there to be an explicit responsibility.  To use Governor Duke’s metaphor, we wear the FOMC hat when we’re in this room, and we wear it when we’re outside this room.  And, because we’re in the business of managing expectations, anything that we communicate is, in essence, communicating something about our personal views or the Committee’s views. If we believe in this second purpose of transparency, then we have a collective responsibility to make sure that our communications serve the policy paths that we have agreed to.  When we significantly depart from this responsibility, we undermine the Committee’s decisions, and we inject significant suboptimality into the policy decisions. So when you think through the notion of the optimizing the work that we do here, I think you can see guidance evolving towards one that includes some notion of timing.  We’ve been talking about content, but there’s also a notion, I think, of timing.  So in other words, we think through when it is, how long we’re going to give decisions time to play out, and at what point we let views come in that could be shaping, in essence, the policy decisions that are made in this room. I’ll summarize by saying that I think the FOMC is a collegial committee and is responsible for the conduct of monetary policy, and as such, its responsibility extends through the whole decisionmaking time line.  It extends to pre-announcement effects of prospective actions.  It extends to what goes on in this room and persuading colleagues of the views expressed when we do our deliberations, and it also extends to the effects of our policy statements and the minutes on market expectations.  I will stop there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. Ms. Raskin is providing her perspective and offering suggestions on the importance of transparency and accountability in central banks' communication.


Passage number 471.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement presented in this passage. It is a simple expression of thanks from President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 472.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I’d like to follow up on Governor Raskin’s comments because I thought you laid out a really good way to think about things.  I would just add one aspect.  I think another role in our communication is listening.  Communication is not just us talking and telling people what we want them to hear.  Part of our role is to listen to what’s going on in the economy.  That’s where you end up in these private settings, really.  It’s not so much that I have any interest in privacy, but rather that the person talking to me might have an interest in privacy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expanding on the previous comments and expressing agreement with them by adding another aspect to consider.


Passage number 473.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Would you like to sum up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 474.
 MS. YELLEN.  It’s great that we’re all in agreement.  [Laughter]  I appreciate the wide range of views we’ve heard.  I think that, at a minimum, what I would try to accomplish is to articulate some overarching philosophy concerning communications that expresses both its positive value and the ethical principles that we need to adhere to in order to make sure that we don’t create undue private advantage.  How we get past there isn’t obvious; the gray areas here are immense.  I share the view many of you have expressed that these contacts are very valuable as we carry out our work, and I think our subcommittee really needs to think about whether we can devise any more-concrete guidelines about how the philosophy applies in specific situations.  Again, I appreciate the views you’ve expressed, and, obviously, we have our work cut out for us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention regarding the need for guidelines and ethical principles concerning communications and potential private advantage. The speaker acknowledges the diverse views and mentions the gray areas and the need for more concrete guidelines.


