Passage number 1.
- 3  { 4  COMMITTEE FOR THE STUDY OF  12th January 1989 ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION  Meeting on 10th January 1989 (BIS, Room E)  The Chairman (First tape 6 - 39) (Interpretation)  «»- Do you feel that after the Report has been handed over, if the European Council, for instance, were to ask for additional technical information, do you think that it is this Committee that will have to meet in order to produce this additional information or do you think that the usual bodies of the Community would have to handle this - the Committee of Governors, the Monetary Committee or the Commission. Should the Council ask for additional information, do you think that if the Council were to say we are going to ask the Committee to do some additional work for us, what would your response be. I discussed this with Gov. Duisenberg yesterday and we thought that we might think of three stages. First stage: the ad hoc Committee produces the Report and submits it. Second stage: the usual authorities of the Community Look into this or that item. Third stage: if a political decision is reached there would be an intergovernmental meeting in order to draft a Treaty. In other words, do you think that this Committee should remain in charge of the whole process. It is a question I submit to you, you may wish to think about it, but if you have an immediate response I would be very grateful for you to express your views, but otherwise at least think about this. Think about the content also of the  Report, the extent to which it should go into detail, and its style.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply posing a question and asking for opinions and thoughts on how the Committee should handle additional technical information and the process of producing a Treaty.


Passage number 2.
 The Chairman (314 - 395) (Interpretation)  Might I perhaps suggest a work programme for the next’ three meetings before we start tackling the two items on our agenda for today. Section III of the Report is one of the items and then a discussion, which  I suggest should be a separate discussion, on the ECU - separate because  the matter is so complex. If we complete our discussion on Section III, which is fairly complex, and if we also manage to conclude our discussion on the ECU, then at the February meeting we would have before us a new draft of Section II on the final stage of the economic and monetary union, which will have taken into account everything that was said during the very fruitful December meeting. This would enable us to review Section II and would also enable us to come up with an answer to the following question. As the Report stands, is not too much of the burden of regulating financial transactions put on the monetary authorities and if we go too far in the direction of a transfer of powers then I am afraid we are going to end up with a solution which is totally unrealistic and certainly unacceptable - but we will rediscuss this. Then we will have to have a conversation on regional policy. The other day Mr. Boyer said, in order to clarify the Situation, quite apart from the general framework which enables one to exercise some control on fiscal and economic policy, regional policy will make us think about the conditions which have to be satisfied for economic cohesion within the framework of an economic and monetary union which goes beyond what the Single European Act will bring about. Implementing the Single Act, of course, implies better co-operation in the macro-economic field and the monetary field, but economic and monetary union is a_ step beyond that and I think that in our first Part we make this quite clear. People are not quite aware of this, quite a lot of politicians enjoy muddling the whole thing. Scientifically one cannot say that the economic and monetary union is necessary for the successful implementation of the Single European Act, what we can say on the other hand is that in order to achieve all the objectives of the Single Act, and if we had never talked about economic and monetary union, we would nevertheless have found that we have to strengthen our co-operation in the monetary area and in the field of macro-economic policy - this we have to be quite clear about. This would then mean that in good time before the March meeting you would have a_ full draft of the Report which we might examine and then we would do the same thing on a second draft in April. This would mean that the Committee would not only have discussed each topic, but would also have an overall view of the whole thing, not at the very last meeting but before that. Would this schedule be acceptable to you. We might of course refine it, taking into  account your comments.  - 3-  If this proves satisfactory we can then move on to Section III. At the last meeting the chapter-by-chapter discussion of Section II proved quite useful. I wonder, however, whether for Section III we ought not first, before we go through the various chapters, discuss the two scenarios in more general terms. Sooner or later we will have to do this. We can of course go through this chapter-by-chapter until we come up to the point where the scenarios are described, but then-~ I suggest that we have a general discussion, not as to whether we should submit two scenarios but about the pros and cons of each scenario. I do not want to trigger off a confrontation but the Secretaries and I myself need more arguments to  support both scenarios. Herrn K.O.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a work schedule for future meetings and discussing different topics that need to be addressed. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 4.
 Robert Leigh-Pemberton (756 - 808)  Mr. Chairman, I don't know whether it is wise to ask to speak now and I find myself between two colleagues whose views have been so eloquently expressed, it is the accident of the alphabet which causes me to sit here and have a name which has both L on my right and P on my left. May I be quite straight forward immediately, Mr. Chairman, and say that it is the business of the introduction of Scenario B that has given me most anxiety in this Part III draft and I have thought about it very carefully and find myself in the same position as President Pohl in my conclusion on this. I must be quite straight forward and frank in saying that. I support his reasons and I put forward this further reason. J. de Larosiére_ said, are we feeling that it is really inconceivable that we should accept an institutional change. I answer that by saying, certainly not. We are going to have an institutional change at some stage in our proceedings if we are to achieve economic and monetary union and I support that. What I feel so anxious about is acquiring institutional change in Stage 1. It is going to require, as far as I understand it, a change to the Treaty and if I may go back to the point I made at one of our earlier meetings, I do think that it is sensible for us to consider what are the political practicalities of the situation, and consequently, what are the best moves’ to make in order to secure progress. I am extremely worried that we will not secure Treaty change for Stage 1. In the case of my country the formation of the ERF will require domestic legislation. The . reserves of the UK can be inalienably transferred to a European institution, we will need a new act of Parliament, and I have to say to you that I regard that as a very impractical likelihood at the moment. I would much prefer, therefore, that we can agree on a Stage 1 which will not involve legislation change, either in the UK or as I understand it in the Federal Republic, because then at least we will make some progress towards Stage 1 and we will not have hit up against the impact of domestic political problems immediately. I would like to say that if we could avoid the problem of the inalienable transfer of reserves to this embryo it would be possible to introduce some sort of body as J. de Larosiére is proposing for us. And quite independently of K.O. Pohl - I have not colluded with him on this - I have come to the conclusion that we could easily allow the three committees to come into  existence that he has suggested - the banking = supervision, the  -9 -  co-ordination of monetary policy and exchange rate policies. I think this would be a good move and I think we would also be able to establish, would we not, a permanent research centre to support these committees, which would reinforce what we have at the moment - we don't really have anything very concrete in that respect. I find myself arguing alongside President Pohl for the sort of progress in Stage 1 that he is Suggesting, really as  much on the grounds of principle as also a political practicality. Mr. M.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 5.
 Boyer (890 - 940) (Interpretation)  Mr. Chairman, I think that Scenario A at first sight gives the impression of representing a small step forward only and one might fear that the procedure which is triggered off will not suffice to really give enough of an impulse to the whole development. It is also true, however, that to go further during the lst stage would require substantial legal changes to be introduced and legal changes require a lot of time, so. the first steps can certainly not amount to very much if one cannot envisage such fundamental changes. This being said I think that there is consensus on this, namely that the nucleus of the central bank system and _ the strengthening of the Committee of Governors are more important than setting up a ERF. If one creates too many bodies then perhaps there won't be enough left to the Committee of Governors, which ultimately has to be the motor of the whole exercise. Therefore I think that right from the start one ought to reinforce and strengthen the Committee of central bank Governors and I have not found one thing which seems to me essential for this strengthening in the Report or anywhere else, namely a compromise, the will to compromise between the Governors in order to harmonise matters in this area. I think it is essential for the central bank Governors' Committee to be strengthened really and to have an embryo of a central bank, this would not be possible if the authority of central banks Governors is not more or less  the same in all countries. If we have, on the one hand, central bank  governors that are strictly controlled by Ministries of Finance, and if, on  the other hand, we have central bank governors who are quite autonomous, then I think that things will be very difficult. Therefore I think that right from the start we ought to make a recommendation which would indicate _that those central banks which have less independence in European countries  benefit from internal changes which would give them a greater degree of  - 10 -  independence vis-a-vis their governments. Then, and this is going to be my last point, I think that one should not accept right from the start that one needs two scenarios, one ought to try and see how much of one scenario can be included in the other. I think this is what Gov. Pohl was suggesting. Could one not include the committees which are sketched out in Scenario B in Scenario A. Without setting up a Reserve Fund as such, could one not envisage the joint use of reserves for the purpose of interventions which might have been agreed jointly by governors. What I am trying to say is that one should not emphasise the opposition between the two scenarios, but try and see if they could be merged to some extent. If ultimately one discovers that one cannot do this and one has to keep the two, but could one not first try and make an effort to see whether one cannot merge’ the  two scenarios. Dott. C.A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their views and suggestions on the topic, but there is no direct disagreement or argument with others.


Passage number 6.
 Ciampi (941 - 1031) (Interpretation)  I would like to speak Italian if I may because I hope to be clearer in this way. After this discussion I really do believe that’ the Stage 1 becomes the most important point of all and it is on this that our most important decision will have to be made, because as far as the later stages are concerned I think that our views are more similar. We have before us two scenarios and I agree that if we submit two scenarios in our Report with different degrees of consensus, this as I see it would water down the importance of our Report and would also reduce the impact it may have on our readers. We have problems of substance and we have problems of a legal nature.  As for the problems of substance I should like to repeat something which I have said time and again and which was a concern of mine. 1990, firstly, and then 1992. If we are going to confront these dates under present conditions then we shall run very serious dangers, dangers for the existing system. I have always made this point very clearly at Committee of Governors’ meetings. Hence, it appears to me extremely important to ensure that by 1990 already we have made an important step forward towards a monetary policy which will be agreed and managed jointly by central banks on an ex ante basis, this in order to avoid our running the risk of having to cope with a crisis descending on a system which has been working very  well for 10 years now. This is my basic concern. Then it seems to me that a  - ll -  number of things which are included in Scenario A can already be implemented within the existing bodies, for instance, the Committee of Governors. There is no reason why we should not give ourselves a Secretariat which would look after monetary policy. There is no reason at all why we should not make other decisions of an effective'and practical nature and which would help us, for instance, to constantly evaluate our policies and we might come up with recommendations about these policies which we might even make public. In Scenario B what I found to be important was the qualitative leap over and beyond the ways in which all of this would be put into practice. I am not saying that I would like to attach so much importance to a policy of intervention, and after all Gov. de Larosiére has somewhat watered down his position on this, I would emphasise other things: monetary policy, intervention in a wider. sense of the word and which might occur after consultation. If one is confronted by a crisis due to capital movements, a joint examination by central bank Governors of the situation which would result in their making a clear statement as_ to the nature of the crisis and after that there would be joint action. to face up to this crisis. This is of fundamental importance as I see it. Therefore in Scenario B what I see is the emphasis put on this quantitative leap. There is no. doubt at all that Scenario B would involve institutional changes and hence would cause problems, in particular problems in respect of the time frame. If I look at this Report, I note that it is written here on p. 7 - and nobody has said anything about this - that in Scenario A "in the institutional field preparation and modification of the Treaty". Now phase 1 provides for a Treaty to be drafted and that governments would have to approve this Treaty. Therefore, although a discussion will show whether it will be possible to find a compromise, as suggested by Prof. Boyer, a compromise which would enable us to merge the basic substance of both scenarios, I wonder whether one can envisage drafting a Treaty quickly. Is this not a major task and I think we ought to give some indication in the Report as to what institutional changes would result from this new Treaty. In conclusion, Mr. Chairman ... (What do you mean immediately.) Well, if we want to have a Treaty and want the Treaty to be ratified you must think in terms of two or three years. Our deadline is 1992. Are we going to have a new Treaty by 1992, yes or no is the question I ask myself. When one talks about a new Treaty is one remembering these dates, because if one does  remember these deadlines then it seems to me that if we now discuss matters  - 12 -  which imply institutional changes one should not lose sight of the fact that a new Treaty will have to be produced during this period, while of course looking into those changes which can be introduced and do not require institutional changes, changes affecting the way in which we do certain things, if this would result in greater efficiency and if this would mean that central banks would jointly look into monetary policies. Not only would they look into these policies jointly, but would monitor  them. Dr. W.F.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
 Rubio (1191 - 1239) (Interpretation)  The main aim of this proposal put forward by Gov. de Larosiére was to have institutional change, because he said without institutional change it is almost impossible to change the nature and the working of monetary policies. That was his main point and I must say that I quite agree with this idea. I also see absolutely no way in which we could simply have some minor changes here and there, some minor new details in the functioning of the Committee of Governors which would then lead to new  monetary policy in the member countries. I think without major changes  - 15 -  there will be no real change in their policies. If we want major changes I see major difficulties because the legal difficulties of creating such an institution are really very very considerable. If we think of a new institution and we think that we want to have an institution that will help us overcome these legal difficulties, well I don't really think it is on and I think that if we do not overcome the legal difficulties we cannot have an institution that will have major weight and a major role to play. The way in which the monetary policy is working means, as I said, that if we want to have change in monetary policy we will need I think a new Treaty ~ major changes. I fully understand the reasons behind proposal B, but I do see, as I have said, major difficulties with this Scenario B. That is why I think that we have to be quite clear in the way in which we draft our Report. I think it is quite difficult, as I said, without a change in the Treaty to have major changes in the way in which the monetary policy of the various countries works. Now, if the Heads of Governments or Prime Ministers do want change, I think the only thing they can do is to change the Treaty in a quicker, more speedy way, because the change which we have set out in Scenario A is really not up to change the set of rules and the framework, as I said before, in which we would have a fundamental change vis-a-vis the present situation - that is quite clear. Now it is also quite clear that we could make recommendations and put forward proposals in the Committee of Governors concerning Scenario A, but as I said before without institutional change I think that wouldn't lead us very far either. Therefore I would like to repeat again - major changes in the working and functioning of monetary policy is only possible if we have major institutional changes.  To come to my conclusion, I think we should put forward just one alternative, pointing out the difficulties that arise. And secondly, I think we should make it quite clear in our Report that Stage A means that, as I said before, we would have to have major changes in the _ present situation otherwise we cannot make a step forward. Then it is up to the Heads of Government and Prime Ministers to see whether they want such a change. If they think it is necessary, if they think that it is important,  fine, otherwise there is not really much point in discussing this further.  - 16 - M. A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the proposal for institutional change but also acknowledges major difficulties in implementing it. They express skepticism towards minor changes and suggest that major changes are necessary for any real change in policy. They also express concerns about legal difficulties and the need for a new treaty. Overall, the speaker is not fully convinced that the proposed changes will be effective without significant institutional changes.


Passage number 9.
 Lamfalussy (1311 - 1373)  Let me start by saying that I will try to be as clear as all my predecessors have been and I am very happy to see the way the discussion is going because we are really touching substance. The first point I would like to make is that I am certainly of the view of those who believe that. it is absolutely essential that we come out with one scenario. I think it would be a great pity if we came out with two scenarios, it would be a pity for the credibility of the Committee and its members and it may derail further discussions into directions which I would prefer to avoid. That is just one general remark.  My second remark - and I am coming now to the substance - is that clearly the major problem here is whether in the first stage you should or should not have an institutional change. I think that is, as Mr. Andriessen said, at the heart of our debate. Let me begin by saying that I do have a fairly fundamental sympathy for an institutional approach, but I will qualify that in a minute. The reason for this sympathy is that an institutional change has a symbolic value and symbols are extremely important, you shouldn't underestimate that, that institutions do carry constraints and I have a reading of the EMS experience in which I. think that the constraining element has played a major role in shaping the convergence of policy decisions. Therefore the greater constraint we have, the more institutions we have, the greater the possibility of effective convergences. This is the reason why my sympathy, and I must state very clearly, goes for the thrust of the argument set forward by J. de Larosiére. However, I must say immediately that I have a second priority also and that is a speedy change in the effective monetary policy co-operation and general policy co-operation among the member countries. My own reading of the present situation is that a speedy change is at least as important, and perhaps even more important, than an institutional change. I am extremely preoccupied by what might happen to the EMS, not in three years' time, but in one year and that is very much along the line of the argument because we have now gone very far in liberalising capital movements - I am happy with that and it is a fact. This liberalisation is happening in a world environment where expectations may run in all possible directions, where the speed of transmission of interest rate movements 1s  extremely speedy, and because also I do see basic imbalances in terms of  - 17-  current accounts within the EMS. I think this has to be said very bluntly. We do have these basic imbalances and therefore things may happen within the EMS that will need a very very careful handling, not excluding perhaps exchange rate changes, etc. but it has to be under control, it will have to be put under control so as not to waste really 10 years of very very successful experience. It is for this reason that I would be in favour of a lst stage which could be implemented as quickly as possible and not in a two or three-year distant future, but starting this autumn or at least at the end of this year. If it appears that the creation of a Reserve Fund runs into institutional obstacles in individual countries or in terms of a Treaty, then my clear preference would be of a first stage, as outlined in Scenario A, appropriately beefed-up if I may say so by taking over all the elements of Scenario B, except the Reserve Fund. That would be my idea and that is the major, very practical reason for - despite my sympathies with B - being in favour of the first stage in Scenario A. Then the question would arise, how to go onto the second or first stage, but let me perhaps come  back to that at a later stage. Herrn K.O.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their views and preferences, but there is no opposing argument or conflicting opinion presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 12.
 Duisenberg (271 - 296)  Mr. Chairman, perhaps at our last session in April we should conclude our deliberations by agreeing on a draft communiqué for the European Council, which would say: we the European Council have decided to work towards economic and monetary union as fast as possible, we have  understood from the Report we have received from our special Committee that  - 26 -  this requires a change in the Treaty. We have decided to set the change in the Treaty in motion immediately. In the meantime we are convinced that we need, in order to prepare for that stage, a maximum of convergence of our economic performance and therefore intensification of the co-ordination of our fiscal and monetary policies. We are committed to doing so and we request the central banks of the Community also to take the maximum steps within the institutional framework, pending the change of the Treaty, to promote this further convergence. That may entail setting up committees on exchange rate and monetary policy, harmonisation of the supervisory rules  through a committee. My answer would be to let the Heads of State agree on  a change in the Treaty and do it immediately.  M. J.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests concluding the deliberations by agreeing on a draft communiqué for the European Council that includes a commitment to work towards economic and monetary union as fast as possible and a request for central banks to take steps within the institutional framework. However, the speaker also adds that their answer would be for the Heads of State to agree on a change in the Treaty and do it immediately. This suggests a different approach or opinion on how to achieve the desired outcome.


Passage number 13.
 de Larosiére (323 - 378)  I would like to make one point. There is a sort of consensus emerging amongst a number of you to have a, as you call it, recommendation on setting a working system to get changes in the Treaty and in the meantime immediately set up an enrichment of A which does not entail any changes in national legislation, let alone’ the Treaty. I would like and I would need eventually even if I were the only one, but I don't think I am the only one, to add to that which I can accept, so you would really have one proposal which would be the Treaty plus an enriched A to which I could associate myself. I would need, and I would ask you to be a little mindful of my position, some language saying some Governors, some not the majority - I don't think we need to pinpoint things - think that a first manifestation of a sort of qualitative improvement in the system through the creation of a Fund, I would refer to the proposal, would add to the credibility in this in the first place. I wouldn't belabour that point, you would put somewhere the description of that idea but you wouldn't make it the unanimous thing. I think it is fair that after the discussions we have had, after what a number of us have said - Mr. Ciampi, Mr. Rubio, Mr. Lamfalussy and myself - it is fair that some mentioning of that idea be incorporated. Technically you could do it legally in the following way. You could imagine, in order not to have two legislative sets of changes that would bump into each other, you could do it in the following way if you took my thesis. You would have, firstly, this A enriched that we could set  up ourselves in the rather immediate future. Then if those who liked my  - 27 -  idea would ask the Treaty negotiators to have two steps in the architecture of the Treaty. A first step that would be the creation of this embryo and then other steps that would lead to the ultimate stages and the embryo idea would then be under the aegis of the negotiation of a Treaty but with a first concrete manifestation. You could do it that way inside the . of the  Treaty. Herrn K.O.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own viewpoint and asking for some consideration and acknowledgement of their ideas. However, they are not explicitly disagreeing with or arguing against anyone else's ideas or proposals.


Passage number 14.
 Pohl (381 - 418)  I also agree with that suggestion. I think that would be a solution of the dilemma of having two different so-called scenarios which is certainly not a good idea. What I understand from what you said and what I agree with is that we have a list of so to say proposals. Firstly, the Treaty, second proposal is that all EEC countries should join the system - I don't want to repeat the long list of proposals. I would very much urge including in this list of proposals - we should think about whether we could enlarge the list to acertain extent or give it more weight - the idea, which was mentioned this morning by Gov. Hoffmeyer, to have what he called a set of rules, in the G-5/G-7 context we call it a set of indicators, that is also in the same line. I think we should give some thought to that idea because I think that is a very productive idea. We suggest to the Council that they should decide on a set of rules or indicators in order to measure the economic performance of the member countries, economic monetary performance, of course, with the objective of drawing conclusions from that in the appropriate bodies. I think that is a very concrete and practical suggestion. I also want you to include the para. which I mentioned on the exchange rates. I don't want to repeat all the arguments, but this could be a list of lets us say 5, 6 or 7 points and then we say some Governors are of the opinion that this process towards a monetary union would be strengthened if one would set up a Reserve Fund, etc. but then, Jacques, I think we also have to say that other Governors are of the opinion that this is not necessary and that there are legal difficulties - just in order to balance the whole thing and mention both  arguments as a statement.  - 28 - M. J.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the suggestions mentioned and suggesting additional ideas to be added to the list of proposals.


Passage number 15.
 de Larosiére (418 - 424)  I agree with that, Karl Otto, and I also agree with your other idea of having some rules, as Mr. Hoffmeyer put it, which would be incorporated. We mustn't write them in a too rigid way because we mustn't give the impression that we are putting so many preconditions that nothing  will ever happen. The idea is interesting. The Rt. Hon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with Karl Otto and Mr. Hoffmeyer's idea and suggests that the rules should not be too rigid.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 16.
 Robert Leigh-Pemberton (426 - 435)  I may not fully have understood where we have got to but may I just simply say that I can answer these two questions in the affirmative, given the explanation that we have had since lunch. I have one question about it and that is to do with your comment, Mr. Chairman, at one stage in which you said that each stage would have to be given a deadline in the  Treaty ... I misunderstood. M. A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. 

The speaker acknowledges that they may not have fully understood the current situation. They then state that they can answer two questions with a positive response, based on the explanation provided since lunch. The disagreement arises when the speaker mentions a comment made by the Chairman, expressing confusion or misunderstanding about the requirement of giving each stage a deadline in the Treaty.


Passage number 17.
 Lamfalussy (477 - 494)  I also have a suggestion concerning the calendar. It is the beginning of the first stage that I am concerned with for the reasons that I mentioned this morning. I am very very much interested in having the closer monitoring and ex ante advisory function of the EEC Governors starting as quickly as possible. There may be two ways of doing this (p. 2), either when the Directive for the full liberalisation of capital movements comes into force, i.e. implementation of the stage 1 reinforced (A), or if that happens earlier, when the Heads of State and governments set in motion the Treaty negotiation. I don't see why one should wait until 1990 if the Heads of State and governments say, let us go ahead with the  Treaty. Let us then put in motion the first step.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting two possible options for starting a process and expressing a preference for starting earlier rather than waiting until 1990.


Passage number 18.
 The Chairman (494 - 498)  I propose that the first step begins on lst July 1990, in  accordance with the full liberalisation of capital between countries,  ~ 29 - M. A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a proposal suggesting that the first step should begin on July 1, 1990, in line with the liberalization of capital between countries.


Passage number 19.
 Lamfalussy (498 - 506) (Interpretation)  No, but my proposal is to start even earlier should the Heads of State and heads of governments decide to start the Treaty negotiations. If they could decide at the end-of-year summit in December, for instance, that negotiations should start, I don't see why Governors should wait another  six months. Mr. E.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is expressing their proposal to start the Treaty negotiations earlier and does not oppose any existing ideas or perspectives.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 20.
 Hoffmeyer (514 - 541)  There are three places where the Committee is of an opinion, that is pe 1, second to last para., p. 2, second to last para., and p. 6, second to last para. Those are the only places where the Committee as such is mentioned and it has an opinion. I wonder why this has been selected in that way, because I am not so sure that there is so much logic in it. You can say that if the Heads of State want to realise economic and monetary union you have to change the Treaty, but this is not the opinion of the Committee, it is a decision that has been taken by the Heads of State and 1f they really want to realise it then they have to change the Treaty. The Committee is generally in favour of the principle of subsidiarity, which is not a word that exists and is spelled in a wrong way. Then you have the Committee on p. 2 considers that the condition for moving from stage 1 to stage 2 cannot be defined in advance. This is not an opinion of the Committee, it is a fact I think. Then on p. 6 the Committee is in favour of concluding a single comprehensive act which would formulate clearly the essential features and institutional arrangements of economic and monetary union. This is not the Committee's opinion it is the consequence of the  decision of the Heads of State. That should be clear. Dott. C.A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker disagrees with the way the committee's opinions have been presented, suggesting that they are not actually opinions but rather decisions or facts. The speaker also points out possible errors in spelling and questions the logic behind the selection of these particular opinions.


Passage number 21.
 Ciampi (548 - 603)  In accordance with what I said this morning on p. 5 I propose a modification in the first indent, the creation by 1992. I think we have to start by 1990 not 1992. I have prepared a proposal saying "the complete liberalisation of capital transactions by the middle of 1990 is an irreversible process in which European countries are already engaged. There  is, however, a risk of creating a surge in balances between the constraints ; - 30 -  to which national monetary policy will be submitted in the absence of an . procedure to establish .... monetary system. Elimination of the imbalance requires central banks of countries participating in the EMS to transform monetary policy co-ordination from an ex post to an ex ante exercise at both internal and external levels.'' This may, of course, be redrafted in a better way but I think that this is what several of us have said this morning: to put the emphasis not only on 1992 but to put the emphasis on 1990 and the problem of organisation.  I have also some other ... for instance, p. 9 the first indent. Formulate a recommendation if possible, if I want to be more stringent my proposal is: "formulate a recommendation on the overall orientation of a monetary and exchange rate policy, as well as on measures taken in this field by individual countries. In particular, the Committee would be consulted in advance of a measure of decisions on the course of a monetary policy, such as this setting of annual domestic monetary and credit targets. They could declare publicly, in the event of speculative capital flows are warranted by fundamentals or by underlying monetary policy, that European central banks all stand ready to counteract them by appropriate interventions." Something which implies a common evaluation and a common action in order to face this kind of movement.   A third point on - this was p.9- but p. ll, at the end. To conduct Limited exchange rate market interventions I propose to add - no this is not the case because it regards ... We are on p. 2, I propose to add that the ESCB would intervene in the market to stem capital movements among member countries which were judged to be in contrast to the fundamentals and negatively affecting an otherwise sound monetary policy.  Maybe this goes too far. I give up. Mr. F.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 22.
 Andriessen (642 - 671)  I ask the floor for two reasons, the first has already been dealt with, it was the suggestion that we should give drafting suggestions to the Secretariat. I have some drafting suggestions as well. My second observation would be a para. about the Treaty on p. 6. (The Chairman: before 20th January.) As far as the Treaty is concerned, I have’ some doubts, Mr. President, whether we can obtain the totality of the exercise  in one national parliamentary go unless we draft very carefully in the  - 31 -  Treaty the moments on which we have to judge whether the conditions to go to the next stage have been fulfilled, etc. I would just draw the attention of the Committee to this point. There is in my view, politically speaking, an important element here. National parliaments being supposed in this context to transfer powers to some supranational body, the supranational parliament not being or not having sufficient powers to deal with the matter and I think that is not a matter of drafting but a matter of discussion to see how we can conceive a system in which we can, of course, avoid too many parliamentary discussions, be it on a national be it on a Community basis, without running the risk that people wouldn't pass it because they think that in the too long term they have to give too much power to something which they don't know exactly. I think that is a point  which merits some more consideration in this Committee. M. J.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker expresses doubt and raises questions about the proposed Treaty and the transfer of powers to a supranational body. They argue that careful drafting and discussion is needed to address concerns about giving too much power to an unknown entity.


Passage number 23.
 de Larosiére (671 - 704)  That is why if I may say it is so important that we give assurances to parliaments that the moving from one step to another is under proper conditions. I think that is very important. I agree with all that has been said and I will also give to the Secretariat my own detailed suggestions which are not very numerous. I had two points on which I wanted to make a remark.   Firstly, when the Rapporteurs come to my idea I just wanted to make it clear that at the very end of p. 4, it is said in contrast to Scenario B only, in Scenario B only those countries which fully participate in the exchange rate mechanism of the EMS would participate in the ERF. Now I know that this is not going to remain as such because we are not going to have two scenarios, but what is important is that I make my point clear. It looks as if this was very arbitrary in A everybody is in, in B there are only a few and now the idea is because of the role of ERF in terms of the possible impact of interventions on EMS ERM currency relationships. That is the idea of this apparent discrimination, there is a reason of substance so I wanted that to be reflected somewhere.  My second point is a question more than anything else. It is the idea that is in brackets somewhere, I think it is on p. 10 - no it's not in brackets it is the figure that in brackets. That says that margins of  fluctuations would be narrowed from 2.25% to, e.g. 1%. I would like just to  - 32 -  make a remark here. Is this the right thing to do. We are going to submit this ensemble of countries to higher pressures in the beginning because of the liberalisation of capital movements, etc., should we narrow the bands at this point. I wonder if it is a wise thing, I have a little bit of a  doubt. Dr. W.F.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of statements and questions expressing the speaker's thoughts and opinions on certain points.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 24.
 Duisenberg (723 - 773)  Three remarks on p. 10, 11 and 12. Page 10, to follow up on Gov. de Larosiére's remark under the heading EMS arrangements at the top. Taking the square brackets and the remark about fluctuating margins together, this seems to me to be some contradiction here. The question is asked, or the suggestion is made, to strengthen the credit mechanisms. That is not entirely consistent I think with narrowing the fluctuation margins, because if there is still a great danger of destabilising capital flows then apparently convergence is yet insufficient to eliminate the feel in the markets for changes in parities, and strengthening credit will not help convergence it will postpone convergence rather than help convergence. The possibilities to narrow the fluctuation margins are also determined by the measure of convergence. I would think that significant progress in economic convergence 1s a precondition for narrower margins, and I would plead to reformulate it in that sense.  On page 1l, the second indent from the top, it says the centre would also take a view on the exchange rates of the Community vis-a-vis major third currencies. I ask myself what is the operational meaning of this, because the main instruments to influence the relationship to third currencies are in the hands, still at this stage, of the national central banks - that is these interest rate policies and interventions. So I ask myself what is the meaning of the centre taking a view here. I would like the Rapporteurs to think about that one.  My final remark is on page 12 that the task of the ESCB would be ee. and then the first full paragraph/dash: to represent the Community together with representatives of national central banks in international monetary meetings. If this is meant literally it is meant to be that the centre 1s empowered to take a position on behalf of the Community. Then the question arises, how this is compatible with national central banks also  taking part in this international fora. The centre on behalf of all of us - 33 -  and we ourselves on behalf of ourselves, there it seems to me is a possibility for friction and I would ask you to think about that one as well.  Finally, Mr. Chairman, although it is not in order I would like to say that I support - I disagree with Gov. de Larosiére and I _ support him that the thought of some addition is being included and I also support Gov. Pohl's view that other governors then also say why they do not like  the idea. Mr. E.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker disagrees with the idea of strengthening credit mechanisms while narrowing fluctuation margins and questions the operational meaning of the center taking a view on exchange rates. They also raise concerns about the compatibility of the center representing the community in international monetary meetings while national central banks also participate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 25.
 Hoffmeyer (775 - 806)  A brief elaboration on what Gov. Duisenberg said. I think that this 2nd stage is rather thin in a way. If you look at p. 12 there are the tasks of the ESCB, i.e. the central bank, there are technical tasks and there are political tasks. The first one - form of ex ante co-ordination and in brackets binding - I really don't know what one should say there because according to the other indents it couldn't be binding because the decision-making will lie with the national central banks. Then you come to the second indent: let us conduct and again in brackets limited exchange market intervention. Does that mean again that we have this question of division of decision-making. This is a political thing and I don't think it is workable. The third indent, which was what Gov. Duisenberg talked about, represent the Community together with representatives of national central banks in international monetary meetings. Does that have a meaning that you have one who represents the Community and then you have individual central banks. I think it is a zigzag thinking here, you really don't know where the authority lies. The next indent: manage holdings of third currencies. I can't go along with that because that is a technical question. Administer short-term and very short-term financing mechanisms is also most technical. Administer private ECU clearing system is also technical. Finally, the Chairman would attend the ECOFIN meetings. But the political problems are very hazy, it is very unclear what the thinking is. Is it again a_ training exercise or is it connected with some kind of authority. I think you have to make yourself clear about that because the Heads of State are politicians and understand about reality, they know about decision-making so you have to make your position clear there and gradualism is not that  easy.  - 34 - Herrn K.O.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with certain aspects of the second stage mentioned by Gov. Duisenberg, particularly regarding the division of decision-making and the unclear authority of the tasks outlined. The speaker questions the workability and effectiveness of these tasks, implying a lack of agreement or consensus on the issue.


Passage number 26.
 Pohl (807 - 835)  eee all of us on stage 1, on the first step and that is I. think by far the most important recommendation which we have to give and so I haven't said anything about Part II. Firstly, I wonder why it is in Chapter III and I have the same feelings you have. It depends very much on the content of the Treaty how it would be implemented and I think it is premature to make very concrete suggestions whether the Chairman of this ESCB should represent the Community on international bodies, etc. The first institutional step is to negotiate a Treaty, then in a Treaty you see what responsibilities and tasks this European Central Bank has and it can easily be that one comes to the conclusion that the move from the recent system into the future system has to be one big step. That is my view, for instance, I don't think we can do it gradually. My suggestion would be that we do not elaborate very much on this transitional period, so to say from stage 1 to the final stage. In my view it would be sufficient to concentrate on stage 1, to try to make the list of recommendations more concrete, for instance, on the exchange rate arrangements and mechanisms - I think I could say a little more about that on the lines I mentioned this  morning ~ convergence of policies, etc. and that we then concentrate on Chapter II where we describe the final stage and leave open how we get from here to there. That would be my suggestion because there one could really  talk a lot how the second stage should look, etc. M. J.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their own opinion and suggestions on the topic being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 27.
 de Larosiére (910 - 928)  May I just say one word as a footnote to what Alexandre has said. I think we have to, we must, try and write something on that stage 2, especially if the very first step does not include institutional changes, we then have to think twice before we say, well then we make the big leap into the big future - which I don't think is very plausible. Then you have to look into stage 2, not only in monetary terms but also in terms of triggering economic things. You remember we said parallelism, now you can't have parallelism if we say the rest is the future, you have to develop a road and I think we are bound to have a reflection on what stage 2 will be. My assumption is that if you don't want to do in stage 1 the type of things  I was suggesting to do at the very immediate, you will encounter them then. -~ 35 -  If you really are serious about creating this ESCB then you have to pool some of your reserves and do things like that, and if you don't want to do it at the very first step you are going to have to do it in the’ second stage. Then you can link these things to things in the fiscal ... I think  we mustn't just discard this. Mr. N.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing a different viewpoint and suggesting that stage 2 should be considered and not just discarded.


Passage number 28.
 Thygesen (929 - 944)  Most of what I wanted to say has been said by Gov. de Larosiére. There is a major difference between 2 and 3. 2 is the institutional stage where some members of the central bank governing board are nominated at the European level, but I can see the problem that Gov. Hoffmeyer mentions and it is explicit in the wording that the Rapporteurs have used at the top of the page describing stage 2 in the summary. In one scenario they say that instruments of policy have to be devolved to the centre, not of sufficient Magnitude to overwhelm national policy decisions. In the other’ scenario, which is meant I think to give the same impression, they say not of sufficient magnitude to affect national policy decisions. I suggest the truth lies somewhere in between the two, some interaction but closer probably to overwhelm than to affect. It is important that we do devote time to describing the 2nd stage, particularly after we have agreed to have only one scenario for the lst stage. It is after all also part of the Treaty process to describe the steps that lead to the final stage and we can hardly have less than two well-described stages in that plan. I must  only support further discussion of stage 2. Mr. M.F.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is discussing different scenarios for stage 2 of a process, but there is no clear contention or disagreement expressed. The author simply suggests that the truth may lie somewhere in between two scenarios and emphasizes the importance of describing stage 2 in the plan.


Passage number 29.
 Doyle (944 - 985)  Most of what I was going to say has in fact been said by Gov. de Larosiere and I would agree with 95% of what he has just said. I am not entirely clear on which the other 5% is for that matter, but my concerns really come back to what I was mentioning this morning about the question of parallelism. I think this is really fundamental to the content of stages 1, 2 and 3. If I might just point out maybe two examples of what I have in mind. The bottom of page 4, which Gov. de Larosiére averted to earlier where he was talking about Scenario B: only certain countries' shall  participate in the ERF, and we can skip the background explanation of that,  - 36 -  but on p. 10 then again - this is stage 1 we are still talking about - all member countries in a position to do so - admittedly in square brackets - would become participants in the exchange rate mechanism. Yet, nothing more is said again on the exchange rate mechanism question until you come to p. 12 where it says: the beginning of this final stage (this is stage 3) would be marked by the definite locking of parities. I have no quarrel with that but I am left wondering if it is really wise or even practical in a situation where some currencies in effect would be fully floating from stage 1 right up to stage 3 and then would be expected overnight to become locked into a totally irrevocable mechanism. I don't think that is even practicable and I am leaving aside all the arguments about philosophy in the thing, I think as a practicable and sensible suggestion, I don't think it is on. That is really one of the basic reasons why I think stage 2, and I would even say slightly earlier than that in stage 1, you have to have if not all the currencies in a mechanism - I'll go no further than that - at least you have to have definite progress in that direction. The.other side of that coin is at the bottom of p. 10, and again this harks back to my concern about parallelism, the last two indents on p. 10 talking about the CEPC would be responsible for adoption of medium-term guidelines for key financial targets and economic programmes, the joint adoption of which, etc. I think stage 2 is much too late for that part to become live, I think that notion has to be brought into stage 1to achieve any kind of parallelism in the thing at all. This is indeed what P. Jaans was saying earlier too. In other words, to put it as P. Jaans said, you need the revision of the 1974 Decision in stage 1 to get that working, because that hasn't even started yet. On a small point maybe I could say one thing that puzzled me slightly at the bottom of p. 9 where it is talking about the Committee's opinions and recommendations would not have to reflect unanimity but could be established by a qualified majority, the recommendations would not be binding in which case I am wondering what is  the point in having weighted votes. Herrn K.O.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear or direct contention or disagreement. The speaker mentions that they agree with 95% of what Gov. de Larosiere has said, but they do raise some concerns and questions about the practicality and timing of certain aspects of the proposal. However, there is no outright disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 30.
 Pohl (1009 - 1051) I had the same feeling when I read that with this ESCB or  whatever it is. We shouldn't give recommendations which nobody would really  take seriously, they would laugh at us if you say something like that - 37 -  because that is so unrealistic. I think it would be much better to be realistic and just say that the process of convergence has to be maintained and that co-operation in the FECOM, etc. should be intensified, something on these lines instead of inventing new institutions all the time. In areas where we are not actually competent. So I would rather prefer to forget this expression and use the existing institutions, but we have to discuss that again.  On the other subject, 2nd and 3rd stage, I wonder whether we should be too precise in that respect and whether it is not better - I agree that one cannot conceive such a big jump, that is also very unrealistic, but on the other hand, if we are too precise and say this is stage 2 and that is stage 3, that is also maybe not inline. It is a process and if we would express that in our Report by saying the final stage, the final fixing of exchange rates is actually the final stage, irrevocably fixed exchange rates and completely free capital movements, that is still some time ahead but we are moving in that direction. The lst stage we have discussed this morning and if the degree of convergency has improved even more than it has, and we have made a lot of progress as you said this morning quite rightly and we will describe that in Chapter I, than one can envisage passing more power, maybe even decision-making power step-by-step to let us say the Council of Governors and should transform that Council in the nucleus of a ESCB. The details will have to be solved when we arrive at this stage, or something like that. I think that is better than describing in great detail now, which I think is impossible, we really don't know when that will happen and if it will ever happen, so maybe in 3 or 4 years we will have very different views on that. I can live with that. (. Simply an illustration or reflection of the chief of ..) For instance, it is not a concrete question whether the Chairman of this group should represent the governors in their international monetary meetings. What meetings do you mean. I am the German Governor of the IMF but I never represent the German Government, it 1s always the Finance Minister, he is my alternate and I let him represent my country. Formally he is the alternate Governor only. What other international monetary meetings do we have - G-7 meetings - the Americans wouldn't like the idea, they wouldn't allow it. What other international monetary meetings do we have, I can't  tell you any.  - 38 - M. J.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and offering alternative suggestions, but there is no clear disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 31.
 de Larosiére (1051 - 1076)  With respect, President Pohl, it is more than a question of representation in international meetings. It is a very important question. If you really want to move towards a linkage of parities and a ESCB I think we cannot avoid asking ourselves and saying it in the Report what would be the nature and main characteristics of this progress in monetary integration that eventually would have to happen in order to lead to the final stage. We have to be able to visualise these things. I think you are right that we mustn't go into too great detail, but I don't think you can just say let us do the first things, which are the set of co-operative measures and then we leap with a big jump into the future. You have to have something that describes the types of progress that will make more plausible, thus also more legally possible, the movement towards the final integration. I don't have the answers on that, but I think it is right that the Rapporteurs tried their hand at that and I. think we should give them some indications today. In my concept there would be some beginning of doing things together which would be easily incorporated in that stage 2 because you could build on it. If it is not agreed as the first stage what I had suggested, I am afraid you are going to have to see how that can be done in a second stage. I think then you have to visualise these things  even if it is a bit vague. Herrn K.O.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement between different parties. It is a discussion about the importance of defining the nature and characteristics of progress in monetary integration.


Passage number 32.
 Pohl (1085 - 1106)  I think this is a very important point for our further work so I am thinking about it. I understand your point and I agree with the consideration but if we want to be concrete I think we really have to think about which instruments we are really prepared to transfer to a supranational institution in the 2nd stage, before the final stage. The final stage is OK, that is not difficult because you have a central bank and the central bank decides on interest rates, on liquidity, on interventions - that is clear. But what are you doing in the transitional period. We are saying, well national monetary policies still exist but they are binding ex ante co-ordination, I think that is not consistent. If you have a binding ex ante co-ordination you have no national monetary policy  anymore. If we decide amongst ourselves on supply targets, on liquidity - 39 -  targets, credit targets, interest rates, exchange rate targets, etc. what can the national central bank still do. That is not consistent I think. So if we would say for instance, in the second phase we could transfer let us Say the right to intervene in exchange markets against third currencies to this institution and the institution should also set general targets for monetary aggregates, but we leave it to the national central banks to execute these global guidelines. Something on those lines I think would be feasible, much better than going into these technical details of whether  the Chairman should represent the Committee, etc. Mr. W.F.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and considerations on the topic of transferring instruments to a supranational institution. They are discussing different options and suggesting a feasible approach.


Passage number 33.
 Duisenberg (1331 - 1337)  May I by way of interruption follow up on what Mr. Lamfalussy has said. I support Gov. Ciampi's suggestion which he makes of p. 4 where he writes that the Committee could propose that the European Council officially declare that a currency of the future European monetary union will be the ECU. I think that is a very useful suggestion, so that the ECU  gets imprimatur of the European Council for the future. Mr. M.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing support for Gov. Ciampi's suggestion and stating that they believe it is a useful suggestion.


Passage number 34.
 Boyer (1405 - 1435) (Interpretation)  I think that the subject dealt with in Gov. Ciampi's paper seems to indicate that the ECU is not going to be very useful before there is convergence between inflation rates. Once there is very good convergence between inflation rates, the exchange rates are going to be practically fixed so the currencies can be perfect substitutes for one another and hence the ECU won't be terribly useful. It will be useful only at the last stage, during the final stage when one has a single currency. Now there is some doubt as to the usefulness of the ECU throughout the process’ before the terminal stage. Gresham's law will apply throughout, before the final stage the ECU is not going to be terribly useful. As for monetary control technique, the supply of currency by the Community as such and by its member countries, perhaps, this is not something that ought to be dealt with in detail in the Report. One could of course produce a highly technical Report detailing the best means of control, the principles and co-ordination that would be necessary, implying a transfer of sovereignty.  So the techniques of controlling monetary supply, I think that one could  - 40 -  leave this to a discussion of the Committee of Governors or the central bank at that time and not to try and think too much about such methods now. Since Mr. Lamfalussy raised the question and there is a very interesting proposal on this by Gov. Ciampi. Should there be a quantitative control of the monetary base or should one follow the American example, the open market system, to deal with the money base. Once there is a common monetary policy the only thing one would be able to envisage is to give certain directives to central banks as to what the expansion that is desirable is like and then give them a free hand to achieve this. Another alternative, a quantitative control. What is difficult to envisage is open market transactions at a European scale in order to control the monetary base, but I think that we can leave this to the technical discussion between central banks which will take place whenever these matters will be pertinent and we  should concentrate on more general matters of a less technical nature. The Rt. Hon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly discusses the usefulness of the ECU and the techniques of controlling monetary supply in the context of a common currency. There is no argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 35.
 Robert Leigh-Pemberton (1460 - 1501)  May I just make some comments first of all on what Wim Duisenberg said about the monetary base and the use of that in what I understand of Carlo's suggestions for a monetary control technique in the Community. Wim said that we had tried the monetary base technique in the UK, we actually haven't ever got as far as using it, we considered it some time back but we didn't think then that it would be a useful technique in the UK and it is my feeling, and our feeling generally in the Bank of England, that it would be even less likely to work well on a pan-European scale. The reason for this is, of course, the case for monetary base control really rests heavily on the assumption or the existence of a stable relationship between demand for the monetary base and the wider monetary aggregates or other key economic variables at work in the economy. Not only that that stable relationship exists, but it will also remain stable when the authorities act upon it. We have come to the conclusion in the UK that that relationship does not actually survive either in developing economic Situations, or least of all when the authorities start to work on it. If I may go on from there, I don't think Carlo says this explicitly in his paper, but it seems logical from what he says to assume that national central banks under the system that he envisages would seek to control  national monetary bases by means of compulsory reserves. You will either  - 41 -  have to hand in reserves or you will be allocated increased reserves according to your need. Surely the difficulty here is that compulsory reserves are in effect a sort of tax on banking and that the banks will therefore seek ways of mitigating the liability for the tax, or alternatively the effect of the control on their monetary base. It may be that there will be fewer opportunities or less incentives to avoid the liability if there is not a well-developed money market, if capital movements are restricted, and if the banking system operates as a sheltered cartel or enjoys a special relationship with the government, but certainly in the UK none of these conditions are met at the moment and it seems to me that if we move into a European Community with full liberalisation of capital movements and the completion of the internal market in financial services, it is unlikely that those conditions will apply in the future Community either. I therefor feel sceptical about the effectiveness of the sort of monetary control that your system envisages through this method of the control of bank's reserves. I am sorry to come to that conclusion but I think that that is what would happen and in putting this forward I draw rather on mostly the experience and considerations to be had in the .UK on this very subject. While I am talking about experience in the UK may I endorse what Mr. Doyle has said about the change in a currency, there is no doubt that when we went to decimalisation ordinary retailers, almost universally, used it as a means of increasing their prices and this may be a long way ahead in the Community, but we have got to recognise that unless we are ingenious in some way or another we shall have just the same experience here. People round up their prices instinctively. I have got various other points to make, really which come on the matter of a common currency in general, but I think I shall stop there for the moment because they are rather different points on the way the discussion is at the  moment. Mr. N.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and skepticism about the effectiveness of the monetary control technique that is being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
 Thygesen (1502 - 1521)  Just two brief comments, the first relates to what Gov. Leigh-Pemberton just said. I wonder whether the experience of monetary base control of a central bank vis-a-vis its own private banks is relevant in this context. What we are talking about here is a relationship between an  international or European system in the national central banks. It is I -~ 42 -  think more constructive to think in terms of the gold standard as it functioned in the old days when central banks' domestic credit creation was controlled by the availability of an asset which they could not themselves produce or supply. I don't think that the problems of control that you referred to in the national banking system would necessarily apply in this case. (7: May I just interrupt a moment. Think about a situation in which there are no foreign exchange controls, and therefore banks can borrow freely from overseas to supplement their base.) The question is what the Bank of England can do to get itself official ECUs in the proposed system. It is a relationship between a European monetary authority and the national central banks, rather than between the national banks and their private domestic banks. Surely Gov. Ciampi is right in saying that this is one way of managing, possibly too tightly, the national central banks. It might be done in other ways, and as I read the paper the authors become worried at some stage that the system may be too tight and therefore they discuss p. 10 and onwards on the methods of introducing more flexibility in the way in which national central banks can by exchanging . the foreign exchange reserves, obtain some more official ECU. But they cannot do so even in the most liberalised system. That will be seen by some as a virtue of this system, but I think the approach is right. It is one way of doing it but it  is certainly not the only one.  Mr. W.F.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage includes some disagreement or contention. The speaker expresses disagreement with Gov. Leigh-Pemberton's statement, suggesting that the experience of monetary base control of a central bank vis-a-vis its own private banks may not be relevant in the context being discussed. The speaker argues that it is more constructive to think in terms of the gold standard and suggests that the problems of control in the national banking system may not necessarily apply in this case. Additionally, the speaker suggests that there may be other ways to manage the national central banks and introduce more flexibility in the proposed system.


Passage number 37.
 Duisenberg (1593 - 1607)  I qualify Gov. Ciampi's proposal as one of the possibilities in the final stage, by implication that means, and I am sure that Gov. Ciampi will agree, that there are many ways which lead to Rome. We all live today in an age of financial deregulation, liberalisation, financial innovation, technological innovation and we all, as Governors of Central Banks, are groping with the monetary control and the instruments which we can use in order to exert monetary control. Not one of us has found the final answer and therefore I would suggest not to stand still for too long today by what instrument we can use when we have reached a final stage, which certainly will be after tomorrow but I don't know how long after tomorrow. I don't have the pretention to know now already what in that future will be the most efficient set of monetary instruments. Of course I would be very  grateful for the balance-sheet example of Gov. Ciampi, perhaps it can be - 43 -  added to the Report as a sort of Appendix, illustration, but I think we could care about the most efficient way of controlling our monetary developments and our monetary aggregates when the time is there and not now  already. M. A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging Governor Ciampi's proposal as one of the possibilities in the final stage and expressing their uncertainty about the most efficient set of monetary instruments in the future. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
 Lamfalussy (1626 - 1660)  I would like to come back just for a minute to Gov. Ciampi's paper. My understanding of his proposal is that it would apply, of course it could apply, to the final stage, but it would also or could also apply at the end or in stage 2. In other terms at a time when exchange rates could still be changed. Take that situation and look into that’ situation. If you take his proposal, this would mean that the balance sheet of the individual central banks as expressed in ECUs would be under the control of the central fund in ECUs, there would be a formal relationship. In other words, the ability of the individual central banks to expand the balance sheet would be limited by the supply of the central ECUs to the central bank. Let us imagine that we have very different monetary control techniques in the individual central banks vis-a-vis their own banking systems, and you can perfectly well imagine that the relationship between the own balance sheet of the individual central banks and the domestic money supply ... relations not only are different from country to country but move in a different direction - this is perfectly possible with the sort of deregulator system we have, we may have a velocity circulation difference. If that happens you are blocked in because you may have to defend the parities at that time by expanding or contracting the balance sheet of the central bank in a way which would go in opposite directions. You would lose your own freedom to defend your own parities. If there was some sort of disturbance of a differential nature between countries, between central bank domestic monetary base and domestic monetary supply, and we simply don't know whether that would not happen. It has been happening in every single country around the table for five years. We would have a major difficulty in that situation and you could get yourself into a very bizarre situation that. the domestic central bank would be unable to defend its own currency or the other one who would have to expand couldn't expand it. That is why I think we do have a basic doubt about the stability  of these functions as R. Leigh-Pemberton expressed. (.: you mention the end  - 44 -  of the phase 1 and the beginning of phase 2.) That would be stage 2. (72:3 defend by what means.) By changing its own domestic monetary policy because your own balance sheet would be defined by the relationship between the central ECU . and your own balance sheet. (7: Defend your own currency, if you say it is under pressure in a negative way, does that mean that you couldn't raise it.) You could contract it, but then the other one cannot expand it and ... (.: the banks could borrow of course, yes, but there are  differences of interest rates). M.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses doubt about the stability of the proposed system and raises concerns about the potential difficulties and limitations in defending individual currencies. They suggest that the relationship between central banks' balance sheets and the domestic money supply could be different from country to country and could move in opposite directions, leading to challenges in maintaining stable exchange rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 39.
 de Larosiére (1660 - 1696) (Interpretation)  I would like to say something very briefly. I think that the ECU has a name which is already a virtue in itself, markets have got used to it, central bank reserves hold a non-negligible amount of ECUs in their reserves - several billion - therefore it seems to me a rather good idea to give an imprimatur to the ECU. I think it is an easy way of thereby obtaining matrix for the future European currency and hence I am very much in agreement with this idea. As for the system proposed by Gov. Ciampi, I think that the most interesting thing perhaps in his proposal is para. 19, the one which says that the central institution will have to decide each year how much money and credit should be created in a community in order to support economic activity in a non-inflationary environment. This really is the core idea, it is this which will give body to the common monetary policy. He proposes a system which as I have said is one among other systems, this system has great faith in one relationship, the relationship between what one calls the monetary basis, notes in circulation of reserves on the one hand, and monetary aggregates on the other. Experience there is as far as that relationship is concerned, and anyway one would say that this kind of relationship is not terribly reliable. Like Gov. Duisenberg I think that one should not reject this out of hand because one would have to find at the European level systems to control monetary creation in each one of our countries. This system as proposed is a simplistic one, rather automatic one, but which may have the virtue of simplifying matters. My thoughts are not yet firm on this. I think that Alexandre was right to point out that one may run into difficulties although I think that the problems he referred to might be taken care of by having special reserves  and having a deal of flexibility. Mr. Ciampi's paper indicates that they - 45 -  themselves got cold feet about the rigid character of their system and introduced a certain degree of flexibility. I think it is interesting to refer to this kind of thinking. Everybody talks about ECU creation as being one way of getting the European monetary system to make progress and we have just said that the idea of rejecting a parallel currency, the ECU, to the present system was not a good idea, it is an important thing that we have said here and I agree also that this injection is not a good idea. It is not going to get the system to move, it is a rather complicated idea and a somewhat disturbing idea, but it is not enough for us to say this. I think that we should say that the ECU after all is the prefiguration of our common currency and we can go a little further and say that it may be the Support of methods for monetary control to be used by central banks. Ciampi's paper is an imaginative one, it has been well-written and is very  logical and it could be used by way of an illustration. Herrn K.O.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. While the speaker agrees with the idea of giving an imprimatur to the ECU, they are unsure about the system proposed by Gov. Ciampi. They acknowledge that there are potential difficulties with the proposed system and express uncertainty about whether it is the best option.


Passage number 40.
 Pohl (1696 - 1750)  I fully agree with what Gov. de Larosiére said. I think that Ciampi's proposal is very interesting and that we should include that in our further considerations, but this is something for the future so to say. I have one little intellectual problem, that is if you have a European institution which is able to control the money supply, the room for manoeuvre for national central banks, then I ask myself why do you need national central banks in such a system. Why can't you say then we have a European central bank and we don't need national central banks because the national central banks have practically no function anymore, they are not able to pursue anything which could be called an autonomous monetary policy. They are only branches of this European institution, which can of course use the ECU as the European currency. I agree with what Lamfalussy said that finally if you have locked exchange rates, at least from an aesthetic point of view, it would be nicer to have a common currency instead of 12 national currencies which are locked. That is a little futuristic if I may say so. We can say in our Report that the ECU can become the European currency in the final Stage or something along those lines, and that the ECU could be used as a monetary instrument, something  in that direction. I have no objection to that.  - 46 -  The second point is that we should take a rather positive  attitude towards the ECU, I agree with that. We should say that we have learnt that there a private market has been developed for ECUs, it is an instrument so to say amongst others. Interesting enough to me is the statistics we learned about, and it is not those countries which have no restrictions, where the ECU is used most, it is exactly the opposite, countries Like Holland and Germany where you have no restrictions on the use of ECUs at all, you have no capital controls, no exchange controls, the relevance of the ECU is practically nil. In other countries, like Italy, Belgium where you have had until recently some kind of restriction the ECU was more popular because, in the case of Italy I think it is very obvious it was an instrument to avoid the restrictions on capital controls. I wonder if in a fully liberalised system, a deregulated system with free capital movement the ECU will play a significant role. I think it will deteriorate, but that remains to be seen and we should tell the public that we aS a group are of the opinion that there is no reason to restrict the use of this instrument.  On the official use of commercial ECUs, we have taken the decision to enable the Swiss National Bank to hold official ECUs - I think it was a good decision and I am in favour of that. If we could persuade other central banks in the world - in Japan, the US - to hold ECUs' instead of DM or sterling, that would be fine. I don't think it will play a major role but if that would be developed as a European instrument it would be fine with me and we can say that in our Report. It has also some relevance if we say it. Having said that we should not forget the conclusions in Duisenberg's paper which are I think very important and which means that this concept of a parallel currency is really "ein Irrweg" and that then the discussion will be finished. That is also very important. The question of the link between the official and the private ECU that is something we have to discuss in the Council of Governors maybe in more detail, but that is also a concept which I think we should come to a conclusion. At least I would insist on a statement, a para., saying that this is not conceivable as long as the responsibilities and the powers of a European institution which issues is not defined. In other words before we have a European central bank system you cannot envisage an institution which is responsible for the control of the private ECU, because it means that central banks are  responsible for the currency of other central banks, this I think is a very  - 47 -  far-reaching concept. That is the third conclusion in Mr. Duisenberg's paper and I think we should also take note in our Report of this conclusion. Having said that, maybe we will destroy some illusions about the ECU in political circles and in the European Parliament, but on the other hand maybe we can add some realism and could put it in the right  dimension this instrument. That would be good and I would appreciate that. M. J.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker in this passage is expressing agreement and support for various points and proposals, without any evident disagreement or contention.


Passage number 41.
 de Larosiére (1753 - 1761) (Interpretation)  Surely during the final stage one would have to give a description of what one would be doing with a method other than Mr. Ciampi's, even if central banks become branches of a common central bank. Nevertheless, there must be methods for the control of the issue of currency by the central banks, methods must exist. Yes, of course, we want quantitative targets, but we ought also to have targets which can be applied by the various central banks. Mr. Ciampi has offered one and we will have to think about practical methods, perhaps it is too technical a matter to be put in a Report for Heads of State but we have to do  something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the need for methods to control currency issue by central banks and considering the practicality of using a specific method proposed by Mr. Ciampi. There is no indication of conflicting opinions or controversy.


