****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 2.
 Robert Leigh-Pemberton (589 - 661)  Thank you Mr. Chairman. I must’ say that I align myself more easily with the original stance of Jean Godeaux than with either President Pohl or Jacques de Larosiére in dismissing the sort of points that Jean Godeaux has made for us earlier on as being an important part of our report. We have acknowledged I think that Chapter I is going to describe the present situation and the progress that we have made. I think at some stage it is perfectly legitimate to point out to Heads of State the sort of progress we could continue to make without institutional or treaty changes. After all, pointing that out could have the modest practical merit that we could make some progress even if Heads of States are unable to agree on any of the rest of our proposals - let's hope that that is not so. There is that merit, I think, in the sort of points that Governor Godeaux has made. The discussion is immediately pointed up, of course, the point at which institutional change has to be made. I suppose one could describe that as the point at which maybe we crystallise events by seeking some sort of treaty change. My own feeling is that we have to be very clear in our minds about what we are doing before we actually do recommend or negotiate, or succeed in obtaining, a treaty change. I am inclined to think that we need to get used to what we have developed under Basle/Nyborg, building on that where we see a need, and also getting used to the changes in our  environment that 1992 will bring, before we can really clearly see what  - 4 -  form of institutional change will be needed to achieve the eventual goal of economic and monetary union. It seems to me important to retain some flexibility about the form of monetary union and how to get there. Of course it is sensible to set out the intended course, but to make sure that we don't hinder changes to that course that might come to be seen as necessary in the light of experience. I would like to suggest that treaty amendment should not take place earlier than is absolutely necessary. It seems to me that we can take important early steps, such as greater ex ante co-ordination of policy which do not treaty amendment, in contrast to which treaty change - at this stage at least ~ might be a form of pandora's box. Let us go back to Governor de Larosiére's paper, which presents a very useful step-wise approach and also allows I think for a_ learning process. I don't know that it is absolutely essential that we need to have a learning process of this nature, and I hope he won't mind it if I say that we need to be careful that we are not creating some sort of part-time central bank and then looking around for tasks for it to carry out until we have really reached the stage of proper monetary union. Could I suggest, Mr. Chairman, that the time to set up the institutional framework is once there is the political will for it to doa real job and to achieve something that national central banks jointly and severally cannot do. Could I put this way, in the form of a question, at what point does a centralised foreign exchange or money-market function provide added value, that is value over and above what can be achieved jointly and severally by national central banks. Governor de Larosiére's proposal is an extremely interesting one, but will it be able to function effectively alongside national central banks who simultaneously it would appear will be continuing to operate their own monetary policy and may also simultaneously be operating their own exchange rate policy. It may be that the existence of this intermediate body will reinforce the processes of national central banks, in which case it will be a step in the right direction. If actually it is always reinforcing those policy actions by the national central banks, we have almost reached total union. If we have not then it seems’ to me that there will always be dangers of counter policies coming from one or other national central bank as against what the European Reserve Fund - or whatever title it may have - is undertaking. It may be that we can avoid such conflict between national banks and the European Monetary Fund, if so  we will have very nearly got to total union.  -~5- M. A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker aligns themselves more easily with Jean Godeaux's stance and disagrees with President Pohl and Jacques de Larosiére in dismissing Godeaux's points as important. The speaker also expresses their own opinion that treaty amendment should not take place earlier than necessary and suggests that the political will for an institutional framework should be established before setting it up. They question whether the proposed intermediate body will be able to function effectively alongside national central banks. These disagreements and differing opinions contribute to the overall contention in the passage.


Passage number 5.
 de Larosiére (1008 - 1080) (Interpretation)  Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't think that there is so much of a gap between Mr. Duisenberg's concept and mine. Firstly, in my mind I am not at all thinking of a huge intervention machine - this has to be understood - it is not at all a matter of setting up an intervention fund which would upset domestic monetary conditions, that is not at all my idea. My idea is this. There is a G-7 strategy, let us say vis-a-vis the dollar, it results in greater or smaller interventions, but anyway there is this strategy. My idea is not to innovate, my idea is to say, in addition to interventions undertaken by central banks - and this will happen in the majority of cases - one can practice on the basis of an understanding as to what the G-7 strategy really means, one can practice in making marginal interventions which would go in the same sense as the main interventions as the central banks by using common reserves, and if one does that one would not’ upset the domestic monetary situation. If one upsets it one upsets it within the more general framework of what has already been "upset" by national authorities because it is really an annex to something which has already been done. Therefore I do not accept that with a huge intervention machine one is going to upset domestic monetary conditions.  There is a great advantage in doing what I am suggesting, at least as I see it. Firstly, there is this message which is sent out as a result of what we do now - maybe you don't like this idea, you don't want to show in a somewhat concrete manner that you are moving in the direction of a future European bank, then I understand that it would be better for my paper to be put into the wastepaper basket and to agree that we shall continue arranging things amongst ourselves. But if one wishes to tell Heads of State, you have asked us to think about a process leading towards European integration, then it is helpful to have some sort of an embryo which would get us to work together. Mr. Lamfalussy was right putting concrete questions, it would be easier at the beginning and _ probably, because of what he said at the beginning, one would be very timid, one is not going to intervene, for instance, on a day when there is a difference of interpretation between the main operators, one will act when there is already an underlying consensus. It is not a bad thing to do something, it helps one to learn how to work together and it does send out the signal. I  like the questions asked by Mr. Lamfalussy because it will force a_ small  - 12 -  group of people who know one another, who I think quite like one another - the heads of the dealing rooms - to work together and then to report to the governors. It is in this way that the Federal Reserve System started in 1913, it made a small start and, with due respect to what Mr. Leigh-Pemberton said earlier on, once it existed one has started hunting around for things for it to do. Therefore I am not at all upset by the stability objective suggested by Mr. Duisenberg, and he is also right to say that if you leave everything to co-ordination between central bankers at the Committee of Governors, you are going to run into this problem of differences of approach between central banks, the difficulty for them to work together a priori. Of course, I am going to allow Mr. Pohl to talk, but accentuated co-ordination would pose constitutional problems for him. He has often told us that it is the Bundesbank's Council which reaches decisions and that one couldn't really hold lengthy consultations beforehand, therefore this problem will crop up. If we look at the institutional approach ala de Larosiére and the practical approach. of Mr. Duisenberg or Mr. Godeaux, if you look at all of this you will see that institutional problems will arise very soon and you will have to tackle  them. Since you will have to tackle them anyway, why not make a start. Say  that before we have these institutions we have to reinforce co-ordination  within the Committee of Governors, yes alright, and I think that this strengthening will have to take place in any case, whether we do anything further or not, but this would not cause any philosophical difficulties for me. I look at this whole exercise in a pragmatic and modest manner, I _ do not place intervention at the heart of everything but I think it is not a  bad thing to start working together. Herrn K.O.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker acknowledges some differences in approach but ultimately expresses agreement and suggests starting to work together.


