Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 20, 1986A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 20, 1986, at 9:15 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.MrsMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellGuffeyHornJohnsonMelzerMorrisRiceSegerWallichMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, 1/ General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, Prell,and Siegman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes for meeting ofApril 1, 1986.5/20/86Mr. Coyne, 1/ Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr..Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scadding, Scheld,Thieke, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Minneapolis,Dallas, San Francisco, Chicago, New York, andAtlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Burger, Cook, and Fieleke, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Richmond,and Boston, respectively1/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes for meeting ofApril 1, 1986.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMay 20, 1986CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there a motion to approve the minutes?SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or comments?MR. WALLICH. Is there some presumption that this situationwill go on and eventually--[not] immediately--that there will becontinuing pressure?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Excuse me, I was distracted.MR. WALLICH. Sorry, I was trying to say that [the dollar]was being held up temporarily, but over time--half a year, a year--would this look toward continuing pressures on the dollar?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would what look toward continuingpressures?MR. TRUMAN. I think the question, Mr. Chairman, is whether aresumption of downward pressure on the dollar is expected.MR. CROSS. Well, that certainly is going to depend very muchon how the economic data unfold. But one thing that has been animportant factor in the dollar having stopped its decline has been, ifnot a change in the comments and rhetoric and the statements made by anumber of officials in a lot of countries, certainly a view in themarket that the attitudes of the officials in those countries--hereand in Japan and in Germany--are such that there tends not to beconcern about the level of the dollar now. Or, at least thesecountries are not pressing to see it go down further. And in the viewof the Europeans and the Japanese, there is the beginning of anexpression of some concern should the dollar go down further. So Ithink we've seen in the market during this period great attention paidto official attitudes; and there is a different perception in whatthose attitudes are. There is a view that at least for the time beingthere is not felt to be any need to try to guide the dollar downfurther.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any safe bet as towhat the market will do over the next 6 months to a year.SPEAKER(?). Or two weeks.MR. FORRESTAL. Sam, are the Japanese continuing to show aninterest in the government securities market?MR. CROSS. Peter can comment on that, but as far as we cantell they're showing a considerable interest in the government5/20/86 -2-securities market. Apparently, they picked up quite substantialamounts of the latest issues. We did hear in the first part of Aprilthat the long-term capital outflows from Japan were declining, but themost recent information--and we talked to the Japanese a few days ago--was that the capital outflows from Japan through April and early Mayhave continued to be very large. Now, that doesn't mean it's allcoming to dollars because there are some attractions in Australian andother currencies. Also, it doesn't mean that they aren't coveringsome substantial parts possibly by hedging; we don't know. Butcertainly, from what we can tell they are continuing to buy verysubstantial amounts of U.S. government securities.MR. STERNLIGHT. I could add to that. As Sam said, they arecertainly [active]; in this last bond auction they took roughlyof a $9 billion auction. The interest does tend to be a littlesporadic and one gets the impression in talking to people in themarket that sometimes it's waning or sometimes waxing stronger. Wehave talked to some of the Japanese firms about it and we get theimpression that there is more time and effort put into diversifyingout of government securities into other dollar securities and intoinvestments in the securities of other countries, but with someinterest continuing in the dollar and in U.S. government securities.MR. PARRY. Sam, what has been the change in the yen relativeto other countries that are competitive with Japan like Korea, Taiwan,and Hong Kong?MR. CROSS. Those currencies have tended to move with thedollar, so the yen has changed against them in the same way that ithas changed against the dollar. And that is a matter that is causingsome concern for them because they see the diversion of what they'vebeen selling to Korea, being sold by Korea, Taiwan, and elsewhere.And we're seeing moves by the Japanese to shift to those currenciesand to increase their ownership in output [facilities] from there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll ask you an impossible question, Mr.Truman. What will be the GNP increases in Japan and Germany in thefirst quarter? What would be your best guess at the moment?MR. TRUMAN. My best guess on Japan is something like 2percent at an annual rate--very low, and maybe something about thesame order of magnitude, say, 1 to 2 percent in Germany. In bothcountries there were declines in industrial production in the firstquarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You think they were both positive anyway?MR. TRUMAN. On the assumption that the nontraded goodscomponent of the GNP continued to expand.MR. JOHNSON. Is that in keeping with what their estimate is?MR. TRUMAN. I would think in both cases it is.MR. JOHNSON. I thought Germany had a more optimistic outlookthan that.5/20/86 -3-MR. TRUMAN. Well, it's short of what their expectationswere; there's increasing evidence from--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they had a more optimistic outlookearlier; there's no doubt about that. Recently, I think they havebeen very concerned about how low [their GNP] may have been in thefirst quarter.MR. STERN(?). Ted, if you ranked policies around the world--at least in the United States, Japan and Germany--would we still bethe most expansionary?MR. TRUMAN. Well, on the fiscal policy side, certainly,although it depends on what you crank in for Gramm-Rudman. But inboth of those countries we're seeing a continuing move toward fiscalrestraint, a continuation of a 4- or 5-year trend. On the monetaryside, for Germany in any case, they are substantially above theirmonetary growth [objective]. They were aiming for 5-1/2 percent inApril and it was a little above 8 percent. That's one of the thingsthat Sam referred to that they are concerned about and one of thethings conditioned to their position in the EMS, which is restrainingthem from providing more stimulus on the monetary side. It's a littlehard to read the monetary part in the short run [in Japan]. TheJapanese really have moved toward a more expansionary monetary postureover the course of the first five months of this year.MR. CROSS. Every time they--MR. TRUMAN. Their monetary growth dipped down in April, butthey too have been a bit concerned about the excessive monetarygrowth.MR. BLACK. But if you look back a little farther, Ted, youwouldn't say that they had been as stimulative as we have been,though, would you? This is just recently.MR. TRUMAN. Well, for most of the period up until veryrecently they were following a very tight monetary policy largelydirected at keeping the yen from depreciating too much; there was alot of pressure on them not to ease monetary policy because that wouldcause the yen to depreciate.MR. CROSS. But they have changed the discount rate; theyhave lowered it 3 times and each time the yen has risen.MR. JOHNSON. How do you think Germany will respond to suchlow first-quarter estimates, given the fact that even they, as yousaid, already have made it clear that even if they wanted to dosomething they're sort of boxed in by the French franc in the EMS?MR. TRUMAN. Well, there is some talk that if it comes in lowand the government does poorly in the elections in the second week ofJune--the second Sunday in June, I guess--that there might be someeasing on the fiscal side. I think that has a low probability, but itis a possibility, I think.MR. JOHNSON. What do you mean by easing on the fiscal side?5/20/86MR. TRUMAN. Well, I've been told that there are some modestfiscal expansionary measures--public works projects and so forth andso on. They have a national election in January and the implicationsof this June election are that they have enough time to move--to easea bit to stimulate the economy if they're concerned--which I think isa very big "if." One of the problems in interpreting those electionresults, as Sam mentioned, is that they are going to be contaminatedby Chernobyl. So there would be less of a mandate than one might wantin the circumstances.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. A slightly different form offallout!MR. MORRIS. We seem to have a worldwide phenomenon of rapidmonetary growth associated with slow real growth; it's not purelyAmerican.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is true at the moment.MR. JOHNSON. Worldwide velocity problems!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In more extreme form here.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes. These measures aren't worthmuch, but if you use any kind of conventional measure of real interestrates, the United States right now is probably very much on the lowside of real interest rate countries around the world. If you use anex-post measure of inflation, who knows what real interest rates are?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions?MS. SEGER. Peter, do you sense that commercial banks havecashed in a lot of their paper profits in their bond holdings? Orhave they just been playing it by ear and taking their time?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think there has been some move to captureprofits on some longer-term investments and to move somewhat shorterin the yield curve. I think they're staying invested, though--MS. SEGER. Oh, I didn't mean that they're weren't stayinginvested but--MR. STERNLIGHT. --especially given fairly weak loan demand.And that also would be characteristic.MS. SEGER. How about their trading accounts? How are theyrunning?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, they have been taking their lumpsrecently as market prices have moved down. There are some losssituations around--nothing super heavy among the bank dealers that I'mfamiliar with, but there are some adverse experiences.MS. SEGER. Thank you.5/20/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions? We have to ratifythe transactions.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. PARRY. Did that revision in the first quarter make yousomewhat more pessimistic about the second quarter in terms ofinventories?MR. KICHLINE. Not much. We had available all of the dataexcept for retail trade inventories when we put the forecast together,and they came in significantly higher than we thought. The CommerceDepartment will release tomorrow the detail on how it fits together,so we have much of this. We really were [not] surprised, frankly. Wethought, given the degrees of freedom that they have in that area,that they might not have taken all of the implied revision intoaccount; but our reading of the inventory side was that inventoriesgenerally were lean, with the exception perhaps of some major retailtrade [firms]. So, we would not want to change very much as a resultof this.MR. BLACK. Jim, do you have the numerical figure on finalsales?MR. KICHLINE. Final sales had been minus 0.4 percent. Theyare now minus 0.7 percent. But I should give you another number:final sales excluding CCC purchases, because they are the big mover.If you exclude the Commodity Credit Corporation operations they hadbeen rising 2.6 percent and now they are indicated to have risen 2.2percent. The changes in these final sales are really quite small.Personal consumption expenditures, net exports, and residentialstructures were revised down, each by a small amount.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. CCC is way down in the first quarter onthese estimates, but is that still positive?MR. KICHLINE. Yes, it's just much less positive than before.The offset shows up in federal purchases, of course, if the accountsare kept straight. Federal purchases were up 23 percent at an annualrate in the fourth quarter and are now indicated to have declined 30percent in the first quarter.MR. JOHNSON. Which side of the trade account was revised?Or was it both?MR. KICHLINE. Imports were less negative and exports wererevised down a bit. So the contribution of net exports is a littleless than had been projected before.MR. PARRY. Jim, with regard to the forecast, if one were toassume tax reform roughly similar to the Packwood proposal, given thedifference in timing between the elimination of exemptions and the5/20/86effectiveness of the lower tax rates, how would that affect yourestimates of real growth in 1987?MR. KICHLINE. I think we were asked that question yesterday[at the Board meeting] and I suggested after a long answer that Idon't know. Do you want the short answer or the long answer?MR. PARRY. A short one will do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess we can take whatevercomments people have on the business outlook generally. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. My view about the outlook is very similar to thatpresented by Jim, both in terms of real growth and also inflation. Iwould also agree that the dichotomy between what appear to be veryfavorable fundamental factors and the current sluggish performance ofthe economy clearly persists. However, in one area--the dollar--itwould appear as though the favorable fundamentals for growth haveimproved, as Sam indicated. The dollar is now 6 to 7 percent lessthan it was in early April when we last met. On the other hand, Ifeel as though the current greater likelihood of tax reform indicatesthat fiscal policy may move in the direction of somewhat greaterrestraint than we have in our forecast and perhaps in Jim's as well.In the Twelfth District we feel as though there areconvincing signs of improvement. Southern California appears to be inthe midst of a broadly based expansion, with particular strength inresidential construction. In the Pacific Northwest, the forestproducts industry is posting its best performance in several years,with prices of some products up 22 percent over year-ago levels. Thesemiconductor industry is improving somewhat and strengthening ordersfor commercial aircraft have benefited companies such as Boeing inSeattle as well as many subcontractors in California. Finally, lowergasoline prices and concerns about terrorism abroad are expected toboost tourism revenues very substantially, especially in the Northwestwith the added draw of Canada's Expo. Just as an aside, we know froman Alaskan banker that there isn't a room available in Anchorage forthe entire summer as a result of the pickup in tourism activity. Socancel that city from your list. Areas heavily dependent onagriculture and energy continue to suffer, however. In California,drilling and rig activity are down very sharply and Alaska has beenparticularly hard hit. Estimates are that each dollar decline in oilprices costs the state of Alaska about $150 million in revenue loss.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Conditions in our part of the Midwest also arevery largely unchanged from the last meeting. There is that generalexpectation that the third and fourth quarters will be significantlyimproved, but I must say the current level of activity is considerablyunder those expectations. As always, the areas that have been strongcontinue to be strong. I note particularly the real estate side,which is growing very, very rapidly pretty much across the board. Andthat, of course, pervades all of the related activities such asmaterials manufacturers, suppliers, and the like. Office building inthe suburban Chicago area is beginning to slow down, but in thedowntown Chicago area the projects are being completed and newprojects are under way; I am quite surprised by the continuation of5/20/86the heavy building in the commercial office building area. On theresidential side in our District--and I guess this is typical of manyparts of the country--over the last three months new permits forhousing starts are up by some 40 percent over a similar period lastyear. So housing starts are growing very, very rapidly.Alternatively, on the weak side, there is no reallysignificant improvement in heavy manufacturing. Almost surprisingly,the decline in the dollar has not yet worked its way through in termsof a substantial pickup in orders and production. The environment isbetter, I am told, but in terms of actually getting deals it has notbeen much of a help. An exception to this is the paper board/paperbox industry which is growing very, very rapidly; their order booksearly this year--in February, really--on the export side began to takeoff. So, they are exporting very heavily and that has been helpful.On the inflation side, I have two comments. First, onpricing: Everybody I have talked to says that the pricing in themarketplace pretty much across the board is very fierce. They arejust unable to get price increases to stick in any significant way.The labor side is consistent with what Jim has suggested. Contractsare continuing to be negotiated on very favorable terms: three-yearcontracts, with good changes in the work rules and improvement on thebenefits side, so that unit labor costs seem to be under pretty goodcontrol. So, in an inflation sense, the outlook looks pretty good.Net, our outlook is consistent with the staff forecast; but havingsaid that we would be pleased to see the whites of the eyes of thethird- and fourth-quarter numbers because they look a little remoteright now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. Like the previous three speakers and like thestaff, our forecast is for a pickup in the economy in the second half.But in fact we find the present situation disquieting. There is, ofcourse, no evidence today of this pickup and in fact it may bepostponed. I still believe that the past favorable developments willshow through in the economy, but sometimes I worry that maybe theyhave already shown through in part in the numbers we are seeing rightnow and that we will see less of a pickup than we all are forecasting.I certainly would feel better if we were seeing movement in somethingbesides the housing numbers.Like other parts of the country, we are seeing good housingnumbers in our District. I remind myself that under normalconditions, if I saw these kinds of economic statistics after such along economic expansion, I normally would not be hopeful about thefuture. But the incoming employment numbers keep me somewhat morehopeful, perhaps. If I have special concerns today, I think theycenter around the trade numbers and the inventory numbers. On thetrade side we expect a turnaround, and I would say that the businesscommunity expects a turnaround. In the Fourth District the businesscommunity, in spite of flat performance, is quite optimistic on thetrade turnaround side and on the overall economic outlook. I do find,however, that there is beginning to be a difference between theexpectations of the business community and of some of the economists Italk to who are beginning to be discouraged, particularly on the tradenumber, and who are talking about the need for the foreign exchange5/20/86rate to go down further. On the inventory side, of course, goodinventory numbers depend very much on what business expectations are.And I am concerned that, if this positive business mood I see beginsto slip, we may then be in for an inventory correction. While I thinkour patience will be tested over the next several months, I remainoptimistic about the second half; but with each passing month I growmore uncertain about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we all seem to be pretty much oflike mind this morning. In view of what we know now, I guess that isnot unpredictable. We wouldn't have any difference at all with thestaff's forecast for the balance of this year. Our guess would be--and of course it's purely a guess--that if in fact we do achieve thosefigures, we might be moving a little more strongly as we go into nextyear than the staff has projected, but just a tad more than what theyare saying. I am somewhat cheered by the feeling that inflation willbe down over this period, but I do think that we might justifiablyhave some concern about the sharp rise in the price of nonfuel importsin the first quarter of 1986. That was not the first quarter in whichthat has taken place. It is pointed out in the Greenbook, page 21 inthe second part, that this could be a first step in the inflationaryfeedback we might expect from the substantial depreciation in thedollar that we have had over the last year or so. That is somethingthat I think bears watching.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, the situation in theSoutheast is not very different from that expressed by other speakers.On average in most sectors of the [District] economy and in mostgeographical areas there has been increasing strength in the firstquarter and presumably through the second quarter as well. Thenotable exception, of course, is Louisiana. Generally, residentialconstruction is quite strong in the Southeast as a result of lowermortgage interest rates. Refinancing has gone on at a very, veryrapid rate. Commercial construction--and I should say it's reallyindustrial construction--also is moving ahead rather strongly. Therehas been a shift from commercial development to industrial parkdevelopment because of the high vacancy rates in commercialdevelopments. Tourism also has improved as you might expect; and theexpectation is that that's going to continue with the canceling oftrips to Europe. Parenthetically, Eastern Airlines had anticipatedadding--or perhaps they already had--one flight from Miami to Madrid;but that has been cancelled completely because of the lack ofbookings. Consumer spending increased in March. So, in general thosesectors appear to be very good.As I indicated, the big exception is Louisiana. It now hasthe highest unemployment rate in the United States at a little over 13percent. The rig count is the lowest since 1975 and the situationthere is really quite serious. One of our directors reported that theonly happy person in the state of Louisiana is Governor Edwards afterthe trial. The situation with respect to oil and energy has spreadinto the Gulf Coast areas of Alabama and Mississippi, which are alsoinvolved in those [activities], so that's going to be a negative areaas well. In agriculture there is not very much new. It's a difficult5/20/86situation and that situation has been exacerbated by the very severedrought that we have experienced--the worst drought, apparently, inover a hundred years. I have already talked about commercial realestate.On the inflation side, we still get sporadic reports aboutprice increases due to the decline in the value of the dollar, mostlyin terms of Japanese goods. But those reports are very sporadic andthere really is not very much evidence that the decline in theexchange value has worked its way into higher prices at this point.Wage negotiations continue to be moderate, although inflation in acouple of our cities like Miami and Atlanta is a bit above thenational average. In general, the feeling around the District seemsto be one of optimism--again, with the exception of Louisiana. Peopleare looking for a strong second half and they are looking for a good1987.More generally, we agree entirely with the staff forecast.While the evidence is not yet in the statistics, we think that all ofthe fundamentals are in the pipeline--lower interest rates and all ofthe other things that we have talked about--to give us the kind ofgrowth that the staff is forecasting for the second half of the year.We have no quarrel with that and we also agree with the inflationnumber. So in general, with the few exceptions that I noted, theSoutheast looks pretty good and we think that we are going to get thekind of growth that the staff is forecasting throughout the nation inthe second half of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, our picture is a littledifferent in that it is not looking too good. Economic activity isdeclining. The data for the first quarter show that while the declinehas been modest it certainly is widespread. We expect thedeterioration to be more severe in this quarter and also in the thirdquarter. The energy sector has been referred to already; of course,it has been very hard hit. The rig count is the lowest since WWII.The employment in that area, though, has not come down quite as muchas one would have anticipated; it was down about 7 percent in March soour view is that we still have a lot more of that coming as we goalong. Oil prices have come back a little, but it doesn't seem thatthe increase, at least yet, is enough to give drillers muchencouragement. We would anticipate that prices probably could turnback down as we get on past summer. Construction is continuing tosubside, particularly on the nonresidential side. The value ofcontracts has been sliding for several months. Employment hasremained pretty strong and in fact is about at historically highlevels in nonresidential construction; so here again we expect to seea sizable reduction in the work force as the projects come off andthere are no new ones that are going to be replacing them. Othersectors of our economy are stagnant or declining. Manufacturing isaffected by the weakness of energy and construction, and agriculturecontinues to do poorly. The financial position of many of our farmersalso has been weakened further by the decline in oil prices becausethey are not getting the royalty payments from the oil wells that theyhave on their farms. Residential construction has been holding upfairly well but we would be more comfortable, as far as our financial5/20/86institutions are concerned, if multi-family construction would dropoff a bit.In sum, Mr. Chairman, we just are not really seeing very muchon the positive side in the Eleventh District. We share part ofLouisiana--the part that Mr. Forrestal doesn't have--and he reportedhow that state is doing. New Mexico we share with the Tenth Districtand that is not doing all that great either. So, we are a littlenegative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer, you will improve the spirits.MR. MELZER. That's right. I will have to try to offsetthis. As was reported last month--and this is somewhat dated, butright now what we have for the District are first-quarter data--thereis really strength across the board in terms of employment,construction, and consumer spending. Our District has been growing ata rate considerably in excess of the rate nationally. We have hadparticular strength in non-ag employment, including manufacturingemployment, and also in residential construction. Also, in general inour area I think the commercial overbuilding is occurring at a laterdate, so we would still anticipate strength in commercial constructionthrough this year with perhaps some slowing next year.Just talking to people in terms of what's happening on a morecurrent basis, I sense that the tone is very good in terms ofattitudes. One specific piece of anecdotal information: A retailer Italked to some weeks ago expressed some confusion as to why furnitureand consumer durable sales weren't really following the strength wehave seen in housing, which normally is expected. There is now someevidence in a couple of the major cities in the District that thoseareas are beginning to pick up.In my mind, one of the most significant developments in thisintermeeting period has been the shift in market psychology. I havejust focused on the government bond market, and I think there probablyis some good news and bad news in that. I guess the good news mightbe that market participants, broadly speaking, may be somewhat moreconfident in their outlook about this forthcoming strength in theeconomy. I would agree with what has been said about this dichotomywe have had in the current outlook and looking down the road for somestrength. I think there is some evidence in the bond market, anyway;I guess it's expressed in the form of concern that perhaps that infact is going to develop. The troublesome aspect of all of this iswhat it might imply in terms of inflationary expectations. I think itwas noted in Peter's report and in Sam's, to some extent, that therecould be a psychology emerging whereby the best is behind us in termsof oil price declines. We are beginning to feel the impact of thedecline of the dollar on prices, and perhaps we'll be moving into aperiod of cyclical recovery and have price pressures arising out ofthat. In connection with that we have had a steepening of the yieldcurve between the front end and the long/intermediate end of roughly25 to 50 basis points. There is always the possibility that this isjust congestion or indigestion from a large supply of securities,although all through this period we haven't really seen any supplyproblem showing through. I think it's significant to note this shift.5/20/86There is one other point related to the market: I attendedthe meeting of the Committee on Investment Performance about a weekago and it was interesting how many investment advisers--I would sayat least three, maybe four, and these tended to be more stock-orientedpeople--cited one of the very positive factors in their minds in termsof the outlook for the markets in general was the liquidity that wasin the economy. I think they were referring very specifically in thatcontext to what they perceived to be a generally accommodativemonetary policy. The question that raises in my mind is: If thefeeling develops that maybe the major move is behind us and thefinancial markets people start to shift some of that liquidity intospendable balances--and in fact start to spend it against a backdropof maybe some expectation of increasing prices--we could possibly beat a point where some of that liquidity that has been going into theeconomy gets pulled out for spending. That's just a question at thispoint, though.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just inject a question here. Therehave been a number of references to what favorable wage performancesare signaling, which I certainly think has been true in themanufacturing or goods-producing side of the economy. However, that'sa minority of the economy these days. What do you see going on in theservice side where wages and salaries have been relatively high? Isthere any improvement there?MR. MELZER. I might comment on that. I think there is anexpectation that the rates of increase will be lower this year than weexperienced last year but still will be on the order of maybe 5percent, down from 6 percent or something like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. On the national level, I think the issue hasbeen stated as the dichotomy between the strength of the fundamentalsand what that says about the outlook versus the sluggishnesscurrently. The issue is how patient we will be to wait for thosefundamentals [to show through]. As I look down the list of monthlyindicators, while there is no strong evidence, I see a few straws inthe wind. For example: the retail sales figure in April showed anincrease that was the best since December; the housing start increasewas the best since January; the industrial production increase was thebest since January; the nonfarm payroll employment increase was thebest since January; the [unintelligible] increase was the best sinceDecember. Now, that does not make a trend but I think there is amessage there that maybe at the fringes we're beginning to see someevidence that [the expansion] might be picking up and that the lull inFebruary and March may be behind us.As far as my own District goes, we are better off than thenation. Philadelphia has an unemployment rate of 5-1/2 percent; it islower in New Jersey and lower than that in Delaware. I was strucklast weekend, as I was driving around running some errands, by thenumber of help wanted signs in the various store windows. So, I thinkthe area is doing well. The attitude among business people is thatthey feel this lull but that the situation is really pretty good inthe lull. Their attitude is positive; I wouldn't say it's robust. Wefeel the same boom in tourism: the Jersey shore, the Delaware shore,and the Poconos Resort areas are overbooked, if anything.5/20/86As to the question about wages in the services sector, lastyear I think the increases were running around 5-3/4 to 6 percentgenerally and in the financial area they were probably 6 to 6-1/2percent. I would think it would be a touch lower, maybe broadly inthe 5-1/2 to 6 percent area or perhaps a bit lower; but those marketsare still fairly strong.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. Well, in the way of a description, I would startoff by saying that the two-tiered economy or whatever term you want touse that has characterized our District for a long time continues todo so. Agriculture and the small part of the energy sector that wehave continue to be under some significant pressures, and certainlythat has spilled over into small-town retail trade and real estate,and so forth. Most of the rest of the District, though, continues todo well--unspectacular, but reasonably well. Expansion is fairlygeneralized in the rest of the sectors. What struck me between thismeeting and the last one is that attitudes really seem quite good;they are distinctly on the positive side. I know many of you like tokeep in touch with some of the more obscure parts of your Districtsand we have obscure parts. One indication of the positive attitudesis that second home sales in northern Minnesota--in the MinnesotaLakes areas--have really picked up in the last few months. Thatbusiness is just doing very, very well in places like Brainerd andPequot Lakes, some of those kinds of locations.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There are too many people going intothese areas of Alaska and northern Minnesota now. They're going totake all the fish out of there!MR. STERN. The second homes sales report was really quitestriking to me, because I think it is indicative of some of theactivity and the attitudes that exist in some of the more remote partsof the District now, actually northeastern Minnesota. Despite theproblems, the Iron Range is undergoing something of a renaissance atthe moment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not very good at manufacturing butwe are really good at second homes!MR. STERN. Apparently, yes. More fundamentally, I think theeconomy is likely to perform largely along the lines of the Greenbookforecast, although my own hunch is that we will probably get somewhatmore growth, in real terms, in the second half of this year and earlynext year. But as time goes on, there is at least the risk--and Ihave some concern about it--that the mix will shift and willdeteriorate in favor of more rapid price increases and less realgrowth. I must say that the tax reform proposal does strike me assomething of a wild card, although presumably that front-loadingissue--thinking about it in some form of permanent income context--ought not to be a big factor. At least that's where I come out. I doworry that as the expansion goes on--if we get the kind ofacceleration in real growth that I think we will--that will in somesense start to sow the seeds, or at least raise the risks, of apronounced deterioration in price performance over time. What ishappening on the import price side right now and the state of-12-5/20/86liquidity in the economy are probably some of the straws already inthe wind.As far as your question about service sector wages, I don'thave any first-hand information on that. But I will say that, atleast in the Twin Cities, the help wanted signs in those kinds ofestablishments are very prominent and have been for quite some time.I would infer from that, at least, that there will be some continuedupward pressure on wages as a consequence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I just want to make two brief [observations].I generally agree with what has been said so far on the staff'sforecast, although there are a couple of areas on which I differ alittle. I am generally optimistic; I do see things picking up in thesecond half of the year. But I think we are going to be disappointedon the trade side. What I keep seeing in Europe and Japan indicatesto me that we are going to get less growth out of the rest of theindustrial world than we had been expecting and, therefore, our exportmarkets are just not going to be there as strongly as we hadanticipated. So, to the extent that we built that into our GNPestimates, I think it is not going to materialize as strongly as wemight have thought. I do think things are going to look betterdomestically, although not as strong on our export side as we mighthave hoped.My other concern is that velocity, or the demand for money,still seems to be a major factor. I think a lot of this is acarryover from the sharp decline in interest rates we have had andfrom the oil price situation, which has broken inflationaryexpectations another small notch. So we're having an increase indemand for other checkable deposits as a result. Just yesterday thestaff was indicating that velocity growth has been around minus 9percent for the second quarter. That is really a hefty decline, sowe're on a similar--if not even sharper--trend than last year. Iexpect that to turn around a good bit in the second half of the year,but it has a lot of turning around to do. My expectation would bethat this velocity weakness will probably squeeze nominal GNP a littlefurther, so I am relatively optimistic about it. I hope that comesmore out of the inflation side than the real GNP side;` but given whatis going on and my expectation on the trade side, I think that weprobably will see a lower nominal GNP performance and maybe some sortof balanced squeezing between inflation and real GNP in the secondhalf.But once again, I think there is reason to be encouraged. Ijust think we are going to be disappointed on the trade side becauseJapan and Germany don't seem to be willing to pursue the kind ofstimulative policies that we might like. I am talking about the factthat they have slack and potential from the oil price declines becausethey are major importers; I am not talking about demand driven typepolicies. They have a lot of potential and a lot of slack. Even ifthey are willing, they have some problems--institutional problems that[make them] resist being more stimulative. Germany, as I said, isboxed in by the EMS; they are at the bottom on the currency[arrangement] so they are in danger of falling outside their range ifthey try to get rates lower unless France goes along. Japan seems to-13-5/20/86be resisting lower interest rates through their postal saving systemand there are a lot of other institutional areas of resistance. Ithink they are eventually going to adjust; they are just going to beslow to adjust. I think political pressures will be brought to bearafter the elections in Germany, but hopefully it won't be the wrongkind of expansion. I am a little troubled by the idea of a publicworks project as a fiscal stimulus--being the source of expansion. Ithink they will be slow to adjust. I think our trade sectors aregoing to come around slowly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You talked about the trade sector. Justlooking at these figures, the staff has a pretty healthy decline inthe trade balance over the next 18 months. Would you explain that,Mr. Truman?MR. JOHNSON. That's what I was getting at.MR. TRUMAN. We are expecting, with the help of some growthabroad and the lagged effects of exchange rate change, to see a ratherpronounced impact in terms of slowing of imports. Imports willcontinue to rise in nominal terms and we expect a rise in exports, soI think as far as the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What kind of rise in exports do you have?MR. TRUMAN. Just in terms of the trade balance itself, wehave nominal imports rising at a 12-1/2 percent annual rate over thefour quarters of 1986 and nonagricultural exports rising at a 12-1/2percent annual rate over the four quarters of this year. We had a 16percent annual rate, we think, in the first quarter. So the balanceis somewhat lower, 3 percent a quarter. For non-petroleum imports, weare looking for small declines--maybe in the 2 to 4 percent annualrate range for the balance of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You actually have declines in the rates?MR. TRUMAN. In nonagricultural, non-oil, imports. On theoil side, we had a big drop in the first quarter and we will get quitea big snapback for three reasons: one, just the variability of thenumbers and the big drop in the first quarter when they wererebuilding; second, gasoline and energy consumption are going up; andthird, domestic production is going down. So there is quite a push onthe quantity side of the import side in the short run--less in the wayof a nominal trade balance than we would have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you measure a decline in domesticproduction?MR. TRUMAN. It is very hard to estimate these things. I'lllook it up and will give you at least an accurate estimate. We havesomething on the order of several hundred--I am not sure whether it is[unintelligible]--MR. ANGELL. Are these data coming in or are they a forecast?MR. TRUMAN. It's a forecast. We have domestic productiongoing down by 300,000 barrels a day over the four quarters of 1986.5/20/86already in the notion of what these countries are able to do. And Ithink we have to begin to look more at this impact [unintelligible].But the possible pressures that may occur in some countries, includingthe [major] ones--not from one year to the next but over severalyears--could begin to [present a different] and more difficult pictureof these outcomes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's turn to Mr. Kohn and get themonetary side of the equation, and then have a doughnut.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just raise one question that Iraised yesterday, which you probably don't have any answer for at thispoint. You mentioned the great liquidity in the economy; some otherpeople have mentioned that. Yet, if you look at our liquid assetsseries, it hasn't been doing much. Can you explain that dichotomy?MR. KOHN. I think there are two things that explain it. Ifyou look at the components, you can see that this must be a seasonaladjustment problem more than anything else. Short-term Treasurysecurities, which were very strong in November and December, have beenrunning off on balance in this seasonally adjusted series in 1986.Now, the Treasury clearly has continued to rely on coupons for most ofits financing but I don't believe there has been a change in its basicfinancing pattern here. So, L was stronger in the fourth quarter oflast year than it is now, and it's partly I think--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Basically a phenomenon of how many billsthe Treasury is issuing.MR. KOHN. Well, the Treasury has been paying bills down abit, about $400 [million] an auction over the last couple of auctions.MR. ANGELL. Is it the number? He should have the number onthe U.S. residents--MR. KOHN. Well, this would be the number of short-termTreasury securities owned by [unintelligible].MR. ANGELL. Consequently, if you had an increase in foreignholdings, that would result in a reduction.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there was a big change, yes.MR. MORRIS. But I think if you look at the trend in totalliquid assets in the last two years, the trend is down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know.MR. MORRIS. So, I don't think you can explain those twoyears--MR. KOHN. No, the other phenomenon that I was going to noteis the runoff in commercial paper this year. Partly we're seeing thatbankers' acceptances were weak in March and partly we're seeing theshift to longer-term financing by businesses. They are issuing morebonds and issuing less short-term paper. And the public is shifting5/20/86something about it now. And I don't know if I have the courage to go,in terms of tightening monetary policy, to where it ought to betightened if that staff forecast is correct. So, I'm in a realdilemma. I just can't feel any satisfaction in being a participant ina monetary policy that might lead to those kinds of results. But Iguess I want to see the whites of the eyes of this third-quarterrecovery; and if it's there, then I think we might have to take someaction. I'm somewhat more optimistic on prices, but I don't trustmyself against the rest of you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to join thegeneral agreement that has been expressed around the table that thestaff forecast is right--that the current economic indicators aremixed and that the current sluggishness that we seem to be seeing willgive way to acceleration in the second half. But I suppose the mainquestion is: What would be the timing of the acceleration and the sizeof it? I myself would expect that we will see this accelerationsooner rather than later--that is to say, that we'll certainly seesome strong evidence of it in the third quarter rather than the fourthquarter. And I would expect the acceleration to be strong rather thanmoderate. I also share some of the concerns expressed around thetable that, with the likely increase in import prices and theacceleration that I anticipate, we may begin to see some inflationarypressures emerging but not in the near term. I would be concernedabout the possibility of inflation much farther out into the secondhalf of 1987. But my concerns would be there and I think that's afactor we should not lose sight of. On that I would see the riskspretty predominantly on the up side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If nobody else has any comments--MR. FORRESTAL. I might just go back, Mr. Chairman, to yourquestion about wages. When I mentioned wages and prices in theSoutheast I had in mind manufacturing; in the services sector we'relooking at 5-1/2 to 6 percent increases, but substantially higher inthe financial services area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't heard a lot of concernexpressed--although there has been some--about the impact of this taxbill on commercial construction, which is in a vulnerable positionanyway we keep saying. A couple of people have mentioned it but theydidn't put enormous emphasis on it. I don't know.MR. PARRY. It should be substantial in terms of changes indepreciation regulations. Also, for rentals I think the maximum lossone can write off is $25,000, which is not very large.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is certainly a change in the taxincentives for all these partnerships and so forth. I don'tunderstand it all, but it's a big change.MR. WALLICH. May I say a word? The [forecast for] theUnited States seems entirely plausible but it might be quite differentfrom what many objective viewers think, and I think we have to takemore account of [unintelligible]. If we don't, we're going to get anincrease in the negative trade [unintelligible]. We're seeing it now5/20/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what business or who they areattracting! Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. The world economy still seems to have a fairlyhigh saving rate. I keep thinking about the fact that the economieswith the higher saving rates over the last 4 or 5 years have also beengrowing the fastest; they have gotten larger. In addition to that, ifyou take the exchange rate move in dollar terms, the Japanese savingrate gets to be a lot larger than it was when you translate it in yenterms. And then when you add the oil recycling and redistribution,that seems to redistribute income to areas where the saving ratesremain high. At the same time, I keep thinking about all theinvestment spending that was spurred in the 1970s when oil prices wererising. Everyone was building tankers and pipelines and nuclearplants and hydro-electric facilities, and these are all long-termkinds of investment demand. It was not just one country; it was aworld-wide phenomenon. But we don't have that left anymore; all wehave left to do is build buildings and aircraft. So it doesn't seemto me that there's much to indicate that the world economy is going tobe moving forward with all that much vigor. World prices seem to bedominated by the fact that there are people out there, particularly inthe Third World, who are trying to get hold of dollars and want thosedollars. I think the world may see enough supplies in agriculturalcommodities that I don't see much of a bright outlook in regard to theU.S. share of the agricultural world in time to do much help in thisdecade. So it seems to me that what Jerry Corrigan and Manley Johnsontalked about in regard to the exports is rather doubtful. The UnitedStates is still the largest exporter in the world. And I think it'sgoing to be a very difficult market to compete in. The people thathad those trade surpluses aren't going to give them up very easilybecause they don't want to take the employment drops that would occurif they gave up their balance of trade surplus positions. So, I thinkthere's going to be a very significantly competitive market. Maybe wewill make some gains in regard to reducing our imports, but noteverybody can do that and a lot of countries are trying. So, [theforeign sector] seems to be a drag as far as I can see.Corporate profits released this morning seem somewhatdisappointing again. That indicates that the stock market may be moreinterest rate driven rather than anything else. I don't know whatthat has to show. I would note, when you look at housing prices inBoston and Tokyo, that it really is rather difficult in a mobile worldfor housing prices to get too high in one area compared to anotherbecause it does translate, eventually I presume, into higher wagerates. We hope you'll pay higher rates in Boston and drive thosefirms out of that area and into other parts of the United States; itwould be really welcomed. I don't know that we necessarily have tomove Texas to Boston, but it's really difficult to go a long time withone area of the country having a rather significant revival and otherareas of the country having very bad [times]. If market forces work,we can expect land prices to adjust and housing prices to adjust andwage rates to be more attractive somewhere else. So I'm reallypleased to see that.My real difficulty at this moment is that the staff forecastfor the 1987 inflation rate just scares me to death. Maybe it'swishful thinking that it's not going to be there. But if it is, it'sway too high. If we're going to do anything about it, we ought to do5/20/86firms, even in manufacturing, are doing reasonably well to quite well.But the very, very large firms--mostly ones headquartered in New Yorkwith operations all over the country and the world--still arestumbling, with one prominent exception and that bears on the pointsomebody else made earlier. We do get reports fromthat their consumer-related appliances--refrigeratorsand that kind of thing--are now really very strong. "Full-out" is theway it's being described to me. So that bears on this feedthrougheffect from the housing side. In New York City itself, officebuildings are very strong. In the suburban New York areas, I think wehave precisely the same situation that Frank mentioned in Boston inthat there is something close to an outright boom going on in terms ofthe housing market and housing prices particularly. Some of thatunquestionably is a reflection of the fact that for better or worse,and I guess it's for better, the financial side of the economy in NewYork City itself--not just banking, but the whole ball of wax--isthrowing off just a tremendous amount of income. Wages and salariesin that area are growing very rapidly, but the standard wage billdoesn't begin to capture it. People will tell you about salaryincreases of 6 to 7 percent, but what has happened is that variousforms of incentive compensation and bonus compensation are nowwidespread. They were once largely the domain of the investment banksbut now they are everywhere. And the payouts under these variousplans are truly enormous. And as I said, there's no question that ina major way that is feeding the frenzy that we see in the housingmarket in particular.In terms of a longer-term outlook, there are a couple ofconcerns that one hears about. One is the one that I think Gary Sternand Tom Melzer mentioned: that while the inflation outlook right nowand for the foreseeable future is terrific, what might it be outsomewhere in 1987 in a context in which the economy is very strong,import prices are feeding through, and the beneficial effects onprices of the oil situation are largely behind us? The other concernthat one hears more and more about--and I guess this is a bit of aproblem coming out of the closet--is a concern that basically saysthat maybe these go-go financial markets have gotten a little too muchgo-go in them. The concern is not just in terms of prices but interms of all the exotic activities and the implied uncertainties andrisks associated with these various patterns of behavior; it's a kindof nagging feeling that there are vulnerabilities there that perhapsare not fully understood. And that uncertainty, as it can bear onthis financial marketplace broadly defined, I think is getting a greatdeal more attention.In closing, one anecdotal comment: I was poaching in Mr.Parry's territory Saturday at the [unintelligible] meeting and twothings surprised me. One was that there was an article on the frontpage of the Phoenix paper that said that four of the highest paidexecutives in Phoenix were bankers and that two of them were makingover $1 million a year. I then had occasion to visit one of the newcommunities developing way up north of Phoenix. And there around agolf course, Desert Highlands, were 70--seventy!--houses underconstruction. And they start at $1 million.MS. SEGER. Yes, but they attract a lot of retiredexecutives.5/20/86machinery, and oil fuel equipment are all depressed sectors. Again,it's a mixed bag. Commercial construction in Kansas City and Omahalooks very good and suburban Denver is still going pretty strong.Downtown Denver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa aren't [unintelligible] likeHouston and perhaps Dallas will be someday. Residential constructionis following that trend; that is to say, in the urban areas in whichthere has been low unemployment and good activity--for example, KansasCity and Denver--residential construction is very, very strong. Butit is severely depressed in Oklahoma, whether it be Tulsa or OklahomaCity.One of the things I would like to call attention to, andMartha has already referred to it, is the revenue shortfalls that arecoming out of this depressed agriculture/energy economy. Oklahoma,Kansas, Wyoming, and Nebraska all are experiencing shortfalls inrevenues. And this is sort of a double-barreled effect in the sensethat the revenues are not coming in and the states and othermunicipalities are looking for revenues and are increasing taxes,whether sales taxes or otherwise. It is impacting those states andwill keep them largely depressed--unless some other good events suchas Chernobyl happen, I guess!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just a couple of brief comments: Onthe general outlook, I find myself in the same ballpark as the staffforecast. I look at the situation right now using that forecast as abenchmark and I guess it's one in which I see some downside risks andsome upside risks; I think they are fairly well balanced. The bigdownside risk is the one that Governor Johnson pointed to: the tradeside. I've looked at those forecasts for the trade accounts byproduct, by country, and any other way I can look at them, and I am alittle skeptical that we can see the kind of improvement that I thinkis built into most forecasts. The other side of the coin is that ifindeed we begin to see the kind of recovery take hold that is builtinto most forecasts--not just Jim's--I think we've got to keep in mindthat it's a forecast in which on balance the growth in consumerspending is modest in real terms, business fixed investment issluggish in real terms, and inventories generally are rather modest.And the question, of course, is if things start to roll will thoserather modest increases in consumer spending, fixed investment andinventories all begin to gain their own momentum? So, there are riskson both sides and I wouldn't want to try to choose which are thegreater risks.As a matter of perspective, we either just passed or areabout to pass the 3-1/2-year mark in this expansion. Over the pastyear I think we've been a little lucky, in a somewhat curious way, inthat different sectors of the economy have carried the load at variouspoints and for various periods of time. Right now there's no questionthat housing is carrying the load. I think we've been lucky in somesense in the way that things have phased in and out and kept theoverall momentum distinctly on the plus side, though not as robust asperhaps some would wish.Looking at the situation more from a Second Districtperspective, I think a couple of things stand out. Outside of NewYork City itself we really do get the sense that the medium-size5/20/86a severe labor shortage situation because we have a number of newplants under construction, mostly in the defense/electronics area,that will have to be manned. If capital spending rises or thecomputer industry bounces back and if our exports in this countryrise, we would gain strength from that as well because we export moreof our manufactured products than any other part of the country. So,as I see the New England situation, we are heading toward a hyperfully employed situation. There is a lot of diversity in this countryat the moment, particularly between Mr. Boykin's District and mine.MR. BLACK. Do you think it would help to relieve thesituation if you took a bunch of Texans up there?MR. MORRIS. I think we could import Texans if they can finda place to live.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Strangely enough, in far north Dallas I was outon the weekend and went into 14 houses, brand new, that are on themarket for sale at prices ranging from $475,000 to $800,000. And theythink they are going to sell them!MR. BLACK. Did you settle on yours?MR. BOYKIN. Oh no, I just like to see what they are doing.That is way out in the country.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How are land prices doing, Mr. Guffey?MR. GUFFEY. They are continuing to fall, Mr. Chairman. Asfar as agricultural land values, from the survey that we take at theend of every quarter, they are down another 5 to 6 percent across theDistrict; that would be roughly 50 percent of their highs in 1981.With respect to the agricultural sector, the winter wheat crop is ingood shape; it's perhaps a very good crop. The other plantings thatwould take place in the spring are going forward well ahead of theusual schedule. There are about 5 to 7 percent of agriculturalborrowers that will not get credit this spring and, as a result,something will have to be done with respect to foreclosure. They willnot be able to put in a crop. So, there is some good and bad in thesense that the crop is good and commodity prices are up marginally,largely because of the Russian disaster. On the other side of thecoin, red meat prices are down largely because of governmentalprograms with respect to the dairy herd buyout which depressed redmeat prices very substantially.In the energy sector, the story has already been told. Whathas happened to Bob Boykin's District has happened to the TenthDistrict in spades. For example, the rig count as of January 1 in theTenth District was at 550; in May it was 236. And that [compares with]a number of about 1700 working rigs in the District at the height ofthe oil boom. As far as manufacturing is concerned, again, it's amixed picture. Missouri, as I think you know, is second only toMichigan in auto assemblies. Those plants are going full out so thatin the urban areas, particularly Kansas City, things are looking verygood and unemployment is lower than the national average. On theother hand, general [unintelligible] aviation aircraft, farm-17-5/20/861, if maybe we won't have to see some more paring back in the thirdquarter because they are at close to 2 million units and that isprobably 400,000 to 500,000 units above where they would like to havethem. Have they taken enough out of production schedules to achievethat, given the current sales pace? Again, I don't know the answers;these are just questions.MR. KICHLINE. It depends, obviously, on what they do withtheir incentives and whether they are going to gin up some more salesby doing something on the price side. In the GNP sense, in billionsof dollars, the second-quarter change in the automobile sector isworth about $15 billion in real terms. We have [projected] another $3or $4 billion in the third quarter which indicates that, yes, they aregoing to have to take more out. Now, that assumes that they havealready [unintelligible] the working off of current-quarter productionschedules; we think that they will have to do more. One of thedifficulties that I might note here is that the Commerce Departmentuses seasonal factors that some might doubt. But using ourinformation, they have their seasonal auto production going from 9million units in the first quarter to 7.3 million in the secondquarter. So it's a big dip. And we assume that a small further cutwill occur in the third quarter.MS. SEGER. Okay. Another thing that has suddenly started tobug me is the feedback of these weak sectors on the Treasuries ofvarious states and what that may do to their urge to spend. Iunderstand that several states already are noticing the problems withtax collections. Is this not something else that could change andcontribute to some sort of drag on the economy? Also, the revenuesharing, I believe, is continuing to be attacked here in Washington.For many states--at least the one I am from--the revenue sharing hasfunded many, many different activities. My final question involveswhat Manley was mentioning about trade and how quickly the improvementwill actually show up in the data. My gut reaction is that the lagsmay be longer than any of us would like to see. I am not disputingyour forecast at all; I am just suggesting that maybe these are someof the matters that could in fact [unintelligible] on it. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, New England remains a fullyemployed economy. Our regional unemployment rate is under 4 percent,despite the sizable decline in employment in the computer industry.The decline in employment in that industry was more than offset by therise in employment in construction and financial services. As aconsequence of a fully employed state, we find that wages are risingmore rapidly, as you might expect, in New England than in any otherpart of the country. In the financial sector, wages are rising morethan are wages in general; in that sector the average wage increasethis year is probably around 6-1/2 percent. Within the financialsector, the mutual fund industry is in a boom condition and much ofthat is centered in the Boston area. One other fallout of the fullyemployed state has been an explosion in housing prices. Boston realestate on average is up by 75 percent in the past two years. Andcompanies are finding it difficult for the first time to transferpeople into Boston from other parts of the country because of the costof housing. We are now at or slightly above the San Francisco housingmarket. The prospects for New England in the year ahead could well be-16-5/20/86MR. ANGELL. Do you have any hard data?MR. TRUMAN. Well, there are quite a lot. The productiondata lag, but there is a large amount of anecdotal information aboutthe shutting of stripper wells, which account for some 80,000 barrelsa day of total production in the United States.MR. ANGELL. Well, it is true that in Kansas they areshutting wells that are coming in under a half a barrel a day. But Ifind that--MR. TRUMAN. The estimates range from [unintelligible]. Whenyou say something like 50 barrels a day at $15 a barrel--MR. PARRY. On the point that you made, Mr. Chairman, aboutthe reduced growth among our trading partners: Related to that is thefact that their currencies have appreciated even more, so that initself is a factor that may be an offset.MR. JOHNSON. I agree that that is something of a favorableoffset. It is just that the discussion we have had here andeverything I've ever read suggest that the income effect is reallymuch stronger up front than those exchange rate effects; and the lagsare long on those exchange rate shifts. It would be some time beforewe got an offset from that, if the demands were to fall seriouslybehind in Europe and in Japan.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Well, I won't repeat the comments I have heardabout the unevenness, the 2-tiered or 3-tiered [economy] or whateverit is, and the lots of tears in Dallas. I agree with the staffforecast of a pickup in growth in the second half of the year. What Iwould like to concentrate on are some question marks that I see--things that may prevent that pickup from happening, even though Iwould like to see it happen and I don't know that it won't. One thingis this whole issue of tax reform. Practically every business personthat I have talked with seems to be discussing that. Last week Ichatted with a homebuilders group. They had done a survey and it maybe interesting to hear what they concluded--this was based on theSenate Finance bill--about the impact on the overall economy. Theimpact on single-family housing would be positive, but they thoughtthat the impact on multifamily housing for sale and on rental officebuilding and commercial and industrial construction would be negative.And a substantial group thought it would be very negative. Anyhow, itis impacting on a lot of decision-making and is causing many decisionsto be postponed. I don't know how that will work out for the rest ofthis year--whether in fact it will bring about some extra activitylate in the year. If we know, for example, that certain changes willtake effect on January 1, maybe we could get a blip late this yearfollowed by a little hole the beginning of next year. I just think itis something to look at. As Jim said, our econometric models don'tgive us good answers as to what this will do, but I think it is worthconsidering.In the auto sector, I believe Jim mentioned that the auto[production] cutbacks had cost us about 1-1/4 percentage points inthis quarter. I wonder, given the size of the inventories as of May5/20/86its asset holdings from short-term paper into bonds. We see this inM2 also. M2 has been depressed in part because the public has shiftedinto these mutual funds that President Morris has commented on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you conclude that it had any policyimplications or not?MR. KOHN. I don't think it has particular policyimplications beyond what you might garner from the fact that M2 isalso running weak in the range--that is, that the buildup in liquiditybroadly measured isn't that large. But it's very, very concentratedat the very liquid end of the spectrum: in M1 deposits, savingdeposits, MMDAs, and such.MR. JOHNSON. That trend is consistent with a decline ininflationary expectations I would think, so you're still left withthat major question about velocity.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to just note that L ratherconsistently has grown a little faster than M3 over the past 3 yearsand that the first-quarter pattern is the same again. It was one halfpercentage point faster over 1983; 1.4 percentage points faster over1984; 0.8 points faster in 1985; and 0.7 points faster in the firstquarter. So the trend really isn't any different thus far this year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's have a break.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll make a few comments, which may bemore in the nature of a summary. I must say when I gaze at this tableof the first quarter that Mr. Kichline gave me, if you believe thenumbers--which is a big "if" for many of these quarterly figures--fromone perspective it's quite a remarkable performance to have anincrease in the GNP at a 3.7 percent seasonally adjusted annual rateduring a quarter when federal purchases are going down at a rate of 30percent and plant and equipment [spending] is going down at 13percent. If I recall, those things are temporary; there must havebeen some strength elsewhere. I guess one could raise some questionsabout how sustainable the inventory figure is. But that doesn't seemto be in accord with what we've been thinking about the economy.However, if you average the fourth and first quarters, I guess youhave a picture that's more in keeping with what we thought was goingon, or is probably more accurate--a little over 2 percent. We had adescription of a very mixed picture of different sectors of theeconomy and different sections of the [country]. Manufacturingremains somewhat in the doldrums; we have a few excesses developing inNew England and elsewhere in the country in all those financialoperations. When I look at the problems, generally, I'm not surethere's much that is correctable--looking at it on a world-wide basisnow--by much change in monetary policy. This trade situation that hasbeen talked about, I think, is a very serious question. But it's hardto see how it could be corrected by monetary policy in the UnitedStates; maybe it could be corrected by monetary policies in Germanyand Japan. But I'm among those who are a little skeptical unless weget more growth abroad, because I think that's what's needed toimprove the trade picture.5/20/86I might say a word about the LDCs. I don't think that'sgoing at all well at the moment for a variety of reasons, mainly inMexico where the political situation has gotten very difficult--stimulated in important ways by expressed American attitudes towardMexico with regard to drugs and corruption and all that business. Theatmosphere is very foul for getting constructive changes in economicpolicy. And they're going to run out of money one of these days.They haven't yet; their reserve positions have been pretty wellmaintained, I think, probably by very tight money and exchange ratechanges. The degree of the tightness of money, at least, probablyisn't very good for their longer term. The economic policy mix is notvery good for what you'd like to see happen constructively over time.In the political atmosphere I think there is a question as to whetherthey will be successful or even want to get their act together to do aconstructive financing. And if they don't do it, there will be veryserious problems in the rest of Latin America. Again, I don't seethat this is susceptible to monetary policy at this point; a moderatechange in interest rates isn't going to do anything for the politicalsituation, which is the root of the problem.It has been remarkable, I think, that the domestic financialpressures in Texas and Oklahoma that should be there aren't veryvisible on the surface. We are learning--or we already have learned,I guess--how to run our savings and loan system without any assets.We're getting to the point of [learning] how to run a commercialbanking system without any assets. Everything goes on faith. Butagain, I don't think there's anything there that's particularlysusceptible to economic policy. We are getting the protectionismthreat coming up again connected with the trade situation. All ofthis to some degree bears upon world-wide economic policy, but again,it's hard to see how it bears very much on monetary policy at themoment, given what we've done.I had a little discussion about what the threat of inflationis. I find that we pretty consistently have underestimated theprogress against inflation. But when I look at next year and thepossibilities, I find it entirely plausible to say at the least thatthe inflation rate would rise quite a lot next year. I don't thinkthat's certain; but I just think there are a lot of persistent pricepressures in the service area and that's so big. One can list a wholebunch of services where that's true, including financial services andhousing. We're going to get some impact of the dollar [depreciation];that's icing on the cake. As for the energy situation, even if[energy prices] level off, that will be a different picture. But ifthey rebound at all, we will get another aggravation. I think we'vedone remarkably well so far on the goods side of the economy, butwe're not going to have agricultural prices going down forever andenergy prices going down forever. The basic wage and the basic coston the manufacturing side look fine, but it's a pretty hard[unintelligible] effort on that services side of the economy. What wecould hope for is that if [inflation] did come out around 4 percent orso--I don't know whether that will be right--but if it's during aperiod when we're absorbing the exchange rate change we might havegotten off cheap. Maybe it will be temporary. To a degree, I thinkthat's what we've got to work for. We can't offset that potentialinflation if the economy is strong, but we could work to make ittemporary rather than permanent and hope to see a little more progressover time on the service side. I think we've got to look for-24-5/20/86protection there from the budgetary action, which I hope comesforward, and not let the economy get overly exuberant if things go inthat direction. But none of that is certain yet.On the monetary side I'm told that the preliminary news onthe latest money supply figures is not better; in fact, it's a littleworse. If anything, the May figure looks like it's going to get uptoward 20 percent instead of anything lower than that. At the leastit's an awkward looking figure. We have said all along, and I wouldcontinue to take the view, that the importance of all these measureshas to be judged in the context of M2 and M3--to look no further thanthe monetary aggregates. They got stronger but they are not sooverwhelmingly strong as M1 in terms of our longer-range targets; theydon't look alarming at this point. If they begin leveling off--andtheir rapid increase is fairly recent and I guess it still doesn'tlook like that's going to parallel the semi-explosion in M1 in May.So I don't know. We have a few tremors; I don't think we have all theconfirming signs on M2 and M3.I don't want to prejudge things but I get the sense that thecomments heard around the table were not forcibly in the direction ofdoing anything particularly to monetary policy at the moment. As welook out ahead--and maybe not very far ahead--the question of being alittle more restrictive does arise. I'm not sure that date has comequite yet. It would await further evidence on both the monetary sideand on the economy. There we are. What have you got to say foryourselves?MR. BLACK. You pretty well have said it all, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've got to be a little more specificthan that! Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. I would choose alternative B, which I feel isconsistent with growth of around 3-1/2 percent in 1987 and furtherdeclines in unemployment. It seems to me that alternative A is not asdesirable because of my concerns about the value of the dollar and itsinevitable inflationary implications. Also, if we were to choosealternative A, it would come in the context of already very favorablefundamental factors; those that we've mentioned would include lowerinterest rates, lower oil prices, a value of the dollar that isconsiderably lower than expected, and of course, the strong growth inM1. Alternative A does not appear to me to be consistent with a goalof longer-term price stability. Also, at this point I would not favor"C" because I think it runs the risk of not permitting good growth in1987. On the other hand, my concern about the future direction ofinflation and also the persistent strength in Ml would lead me tofavor variant III of the directive. To inform financial markets thatthere is concern on our part about the growth of money would seem tomake some sense.The other point I'd just add parenthetically is that I cancome up with a scenario where M2 and M3 may become somewhat more of aproblem. Over the last 6 months to a year we've seen an awful lot ofmoney going into mutual funds, stocks, bonds, and municipals, and wheninvestors believe that the interest rates are going to turn thosefunds are going to come back to short-term assets. And if they comeback short, they're going to go into M2 and M3 and we could see much5/20/86faster growth in M2 and M3 at that point--primarily as a result ofportfolio shifts. It would not necessarily indicate that people aregoing to be using these [funds] for transaction purposes. But Iwouldn't derive a great deal of comfort by the well-behaved pattern ofM2 and M3 at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say a word about thesedirectives. One can debate the particular language but we are so faroff the numbers in the directive labeled "alternative draft I," whichis the same as the one we had last time, that that seems to me to be akind of bare-faced evasion of responsibility. [We should be] reacto what has happened in a somewhat more sophisticated way than justputting in different numbers in the existing directive, which raisesthe question of what has been happening here. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, I'd also favor alternative B, largely forthe reasons Bob stated. I came to the meeting wondering whether wemight not fiddle with the words "might" and "would;" but based on theconversation I would not. I would make it symmetrical on both sides.I'd favor the second draft alternative. That seems to me aresponsible way of dealing with the aberrations that we'veexperienced. I just have a slight fear that if we drop the numbersaltogether, as called for in the third alternative draft, it might bea bit [unintelligible] for doing anything like that. We might savethat for the July meeting. So, I'd be in favor of "B" with thewording proposed in the second alternative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I came to the meeting with acouple of questions in mind and one was, though I agree with the staffforecast: Do I really believe it's going to happen? I also had aquestion about whether I should continue to believe in the lags thateveryone keeps telling me are going to catch up with us one of thesedays. But I guess I come out feeling, for all of the reasons thatwere discussed before, that I probably should believe the forecast.Given that belief, I do think we are going to get the kind of growththat we are looking for. And that leads to another question which is:If we do in fact achieve that kind of growth, should we attempt topush the economy a little further to stimulate it more? I think thatthere are some dangers in doing that; I think that would tend to pushus beyond the long-term trend of the economy. To me the risk at themoment is an overstimulation and the reigniting of inflation andinflationary expectatio As has been noted, we already have somedangerous inflation in the service sector of the economy.So, having gone through that analysis I come out, as youwould expect I suppose, for alternative B--not to change policy at themoment. I was struck, though, by the discussion around the table. Wehad some remarks earlier on that we are expecting this kind of growthbut we are not really seeing it showing up in the statistics. Itseems to me that we heard this morning that that kind of growth isperhaps beginning to surface, at least in some parts of the country.There was a lot of divergence, but at least in my own area--and Iheard others say this--we are beginning to get some statisticalevidence that the growth we're looking for is perhaps coming on line.So again, Mr. Chairman, I would choose alternative B with a 5 to 9percent associated federal funds rate. And I suppose that would5/20/86suggest to me a borrowing level of about $300 million. I too wouldlike to have a directive that would take account of what has beenhappening to the monetary aggregates: I think not to acknowledge thatovershoot would not be responsible. I had originally thought that thebasic drafting of alternative I would be acceptable with the inclusionof the language about the monetary aggregates shown in alternative II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I share the optimismabout growth over the second half of the year and, as a result, thelack of good evidence at the moment creates an uncertainty thatsuggests to me that alternative B is the appropriate prescription forpolicy in the period ahead simply because we don't know what ishappening and that alternative pretty much holds the current position.As to the directive itself, I would favor draft alternative II for thereason that there is a recognition of the rapid growth in theaggregates that has already taken place and that we would expectthrough the second quarter. And it places M2 and M3 first, withsimply a recognition following that of the M1 growth. Lastly, it doessuggest or maintain the idea that some firming could take place in thefuture given that rapid growth, if the economy begins to perform as wewould anticipate and the pressures begin to show up in prices. Allthose things to me seem to be consistent with (1) what we think andhope the outlook will be, and (2) a realization that M1, M2, and M3are outside [their ranges] and that the numbers are somewhat differentthan last month, but nonetheless we maintain them as guideposts.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're somewhat different all right!That's an understatement of the situation.MR. GUFFEY. Well, draft directive III has no numbers in itat all with respect to any of the aggregates. I think that's a rathermarked departure from what we've done in the past and one that I wouldnot feel comfortable with.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, as you indicated in the beginning--and I think you pretty well said it all--the economy is being pulledin a lot of different directions. And it seems to me that this is atime when perhaps we should stay about where we are. Looking at theeconomic factors, there doesn't seem to be any reason for easing ifwe're half-way right in our assessment of what the economy is doing.And Ml, as we know, has been going through the ceiling and now thebroader aggregates seem to be picking up a good deal. We have thesespecial problems with particular sectors like agriculture and othermanufacturing, but as you pointed out those are not things that we canaddress very well with monetary policy. If we tried to nudge thedollar down, for example, it might well backfire on us and we'd reallyachieve no improvement in our balance of payments. So, I've come downto the point that I think we ought to stay about where we are. Iwould go with "B," although in the absence of a sharp deceleration ineconomic activity I'd be real happy if the aggregates came in at "C"or even below that. But if we get a clear signal that activity isbeginning to accelerate beyond what any of us seem to expect and ifthe aggregates also are strengthening more than we anticipate, then Ithink we're going to have to be prepared at some early point to think5/20/86in terms of moving in the direction, anyway, of restraint. I wouldnot say restraint, but in that direction. I think alternative III--and this probably will surprise most of you, knowing my past views--really captures the posture. I think we ought to take it at thispoint; I hasten to add, however, that I would want to reinsert theshort-term numerical targets for the aggregates when we get around toaddressing the longer-term aggregates at our July meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. I'd be in favor of maintaining the existingdegree of restraint right now but I definitely would have a bias inthe direction of a somewhat firmer policy. In other words, at thispoint in time, I think it's more likely that we will have to firm thanease, as you said earlier. What concerns me is that there is alwaysthe possibility that when we see the "whites of their eyes" it will betoo late. I am not sure that this is the time to begin to get some[unintelligible] back in, but we may be getting close to that time.And I would be particularly concerned if we did see some pickup ineconomic activity and that didn't flow through to a firming in thedollar; I think Sam said before that the trend in general still seemsto be downward. That would concern me--if there really came a timewhen almost no matter what we did we couldn't easily turn that tide.In any case, I would be in favor of the existing degree of reserverestraint, but would favor language that would indicate somethingother than symmetry--language that would indicate possibly movingtoward a firmer policy down the road.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. First of all, I gathered from trying to piecetogether a few comments in the Bluebook and the Greenbook that thestaff views at least the upper end of the M1 target as beingconsistent with the GNP forecast and that that can be achieved atroughly today's interest rates. So that implies a significant slowingin M1 over the balance of the year without any action on our part. Ifall of that is right then I, too, favor alternative B. As far as Ican judge, it will take us about where we want to go. I do think, asothers have commented, that the directive language perhaps matters agreat deal this time around. I have a strong preference for the thirdalternative principally because, at least in my mind, that is theclearest statement of what we intend to do if growth in the aggregatesdoesn't slow as expected; and I think it's probably important to makethat point. I also think that we can insert a sentence in there withsome numbers if that's desirable; certainly that's doable. I am alittle concerned about the language in there having to do with lesserreserve restraint because it points to things like slowing moneygrowth or the foreign exchange markets whereas I think that slowingmoney growth and a stronger dollar might at least in the short run bemore than welcome. I am not sure that I would want to respond tothat. Beyond that, it also refers to sluggish economic performanceand I think we have largely conceded that growth in the second quarterat least is going to turn out to look kind of sluggish--real growth of2 percent, given the adjustment that is still going on in the energysector and so forth. So I would be a little concerned about that kindof language--that such developments might prompt a policy response,and I don't find that appropriate at this juncture.-28-5/20/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think alternative B is the right policy coursegiven the mix of hopes and anxieties and uncertainties that we face.As to what we do about an M1 that has blown out of its targets: Ithink we do have to acknowledge it, and I think something along thelines of variant II for the operational paragraph is right. To go allthe way to variant III I think is premature. We will be having ameeting in July in which we will have to reevaluate the aggregates forthe second half of the year. It may be prudent at that time--or itmay not be--to change the target ranges. It may also be appropriateto acknowledge a different weighting; but it seems to me that a mid-quarter meeting is not the appropriate time to do that. So, I wouldacknowledge that [monetary growth] is over the target and then have amore fundamental look at the normal point in the calendar in July.There is also the advantage in July that [your Congressional]testimony would be following our decision fairly promptly and whateverwe do can be wrapped around the appropriate words.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris. Mr. Morris has stepped out.Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I also favor alternative B and I prefer draftII. I would want to be a little clearer on the fourth line of draftII to say rapid M1 growth and weakness in M1 velocity. I am not surethat M2 is rapid when it's right in the middle of our range andexpected to be in the middle of the range. I do believe, however,that there is another immediate policy move that needs to be made toreflect the weakness of the dollar and the undesirability of furtherweakening of the dollar at this point. I would think it would be justideal if the Chairman could negotiate with the Secretary of theTreasury so he would be willing to have intervention on behalf of thedollar, provided the Japanese and Germans cut their discount rates 1/2point. So, I would like to see something take place in thisenvironment; and I think that would be a step that would be helpful toeveryone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we discuss the attitude towardintervention a little after we get finished with this instead ofmixing it up. If you want to discuss it, I think it may be a goodidea. We will reach this decision and then discuss that. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I also support alternative B butfor different reasons, it seems. The stronger growth projected in thesecond half is really entirely a function of the improvement in thetrade balance, and our ability to forecast the timing and magnitude ofchanges in the trade balance is not so great that we can haveconfidence that we can forecast it extremely well this time. If wedon't get a third-quarter improvment in the trade balance, I think wewill continue to have a pretty sluggish forecast. I don't seeanything else that is going to pull the economy [up] very rapidly.So, I don't think we can move on the anticipation that the thirdquarter is in the bag yet. As a lot of people have said, we have tosee the whites of the eyes of this narrowing trade deficit.I question whether we are in fact putting excessive liquidityinto the system now. I proposed, when we were last talking about thelong-range targets, that we set targets for M3 and total liquid-29-5/20/86assets; I assumed a minus 1 percent velocity for 1986. As I look atthe fourth-quarter [and] the first-quarter rates of growth that wouldbe compatible with a growth of 6 to 6-1/2 percent for nominal GNP Idon't see that; the only thing in the picture that would lead one tothink that we are building excessive liquidity is M1. I am not verysure that we understand the meaning of that growth of M1 for futureeconomic growth.On the inflation front, I am more optimistic I think thanmany around the table, but I have been looking at what I call the"core" inflation rate and that is the price indexes eliminating foodand energy. If you do that, you see that there hasn't been anydeceleration in the inflation rate in 1985; and if you look at theprojected inflation rate for 1987, it doesn't look at all bad becauseit is not much different than the core inflation rate now. It justdepends on what set of numbers you have gotten used to looking at. Ithink quite clearly the recent sets of numbers for the CPI and thewholesale price index had a lot of one-shot effects from food andenergy that are not going to be repeated; we have to understand thatthis is an aberration. And when the inflation rate gets back to thecore rate, we shouldn't be too much alarmed because that was thefundamental situation all along.With respect to the directive, I appear to be the only onefavoring draft directive I. The reason is that it seems very clear tome that when we meet in July, we're going to look at the growth rateof M1 and either we will have to eliminate M1 as a target or rebase itagain. I think that is clearly in the cards. And if that is thecase, I don't see any reason to equivocate in letting the market knowwhat they already know: that we are discounting M1 in monetary policy.I don't think we kid anybody if we think the market feels otherwise.I don't think we can tell the market a different story with a[different] form of the directive than the former directive because Idon't think we really mean it. Are we really going to tighten upmoney and tighten up interest rates in a sluggish economy in order toget the M1 growth rate down? If we are not, then it seems to me it'stime to recognize that fact; and it seems to me directive I is anideal way of beginning to do that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You leave me totally confused, if I maysay so. I would think the thrust of your comments would lead you towant to change directive I.MR. MORRIS. Well, directive I is where we talk about theexpected rates of growth of M2 and M3 and it has language, which comesin after that, to the effect that the growth of Ml is uncertain. Thatsuggests to me a downgrading of the significance of M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. People can read the same thingdifferently, but I think the interpretation of keeping alternative Iwould be that nothing has changed in relative emphasis because wehaven't changed the language. If we want to change the relativeemphasis we would change the wording of the directive. The [draft]wording may not be perfect, but--MR. MORRIS. Well, I would be happy to make that suggestionalso. If you accept the proposition that we are going to have to do5/20/86something in July, it seems to me to make sense to start doingsomething now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to argue the point insubstance. All I am saying is that if you want to make a change, Iwould think that the last thing you would want is the old directiverepeated again, which says we are not changing anything.MR. MORRIS. Perhaps I inferred that drafts II and III implythat we are going to give a lot more emphasis to Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think they're implying that.MR. MORRIS. Well, maybe these things are getting so obscure,Mr. Chairman, that we ought to decide what they mean.MR. ANGELL. I think that's pretty close to the truth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Well, I would support maintaining the existingreserve pressure but I have the same problem with the alternativespresented today as I did a few months ago, and that is that thereseems to be so little difference among them. I would like Bob Parryto give me the model that shows the impact in 1987 of a difference inM1 growth in this quarter of 3/4 percentage point at annual ratebetween "A" and "B" and another 3/4 percentage point between "B" and"C," and 1/2 percentage point between the alternatives for M2, and 1/4point between those for M3. I would like you to tell me how thosemarginal changes will impact on inflation, trade, auto sales, housing,etc. in 1987. I think these are very, very, tiny differences. As Isay, I'm totally willing to go with maintaining the existing reservepressure; but "A" doesn't send a message to me that it is a big changein the easing direction, nor does "C" seem like a big change the otherway, particularly when we are talking about [a quarter point on these]numbers. Maybe I am missing something or maybe you are hiding thoseequations from me, but I haven't seen that kind of forecasting abilityaround here. Anyhow, in terms of the problems in the economy, as Isaid, I doubt that "A," "B," or "C" will solve our trade problemsimmediately or take care of manufacturing or third world debt or allof the other ailments we talk about. So, for that reason I will stickwith the status quo. On the directives, again because we are going totake a fresh look at this in July, I would just go with alternativeII.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I also would agree that alternative B is theright approach. However, I generally agree with what Frank was sayingon the directive. I don't know exactly what the right language is,but I would prefer to be as neutral as possible on the directive. Icertainly wouldn't want to acknowledge the growth of M1 at this pointbecause right now we are still trying to determine whether that growthis a response to the decline in interest rates and whether the demandfor money might lead us actually to want to increase bank reserves,rather than cut back on the growth of Ml, to accommodate a furthershift in the demand for money--at least an increase in the quantitydemanded because of some [unintelligible]. I certainly wouldn't want5/20/86to send out the red flag about the fact that we're concerned it isgrowing too fast when we don't even know yet whether this is aportfolio shift or whether what's going on is a result of declininginterest rates and inflationary expectations or whether it issomething to be concerned about. There are only six weeks before thenext meeting, and I'd say we certainly don't have to get stewed upabout the aggregates when we can address this whole issue verycarefully in July. We can decide then what we are going to do aboutthe targets when we have a better chance to judge whether anything ishappening to the economy as a result. Right now all around the tablewe have said very clearly that nobody sees any strong evidence thatanything is going on. We're still in this 2 percent pattern. We areall hopeful with regard to the forecast, I agree; I too am optimisticabout the second half of the year. But until we get a little evidenceat least in the orders data--or something to indicate that there's apickup--I would like to remain absolutely neutral in the directiveabout where we want to go. I wouldn't want to send out any signalwhatsoever to the market at this point. I would wait six weeks andsee what we want to do then. That's when we ought to have a littlemore time to decide whether the second half of the year is going to bethe kind of situation we are hoping for.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I also would agree onalternative B for all of the reasons that were given. On thedirective, I agree with Frank and Manuel's point of staying neutral;it seems to me that alternative III does that much more thanalternative I, as was discussed earlier. It does not use numbers;it's very straightforward. In fact, it says we don't know. We dohave July coming up and that's a traditional point at which we take anew look at this. This [directive] would not become public untilafter the July meeting, which I assume would be pretty close to thetime that you would be testifying. You would have the opportunity toexplain it all. It seems to me this signal of not putting any numbersin right now, as in draft directive III, is the best indication ofconsistency, [acknowledging] that we are a bit confused. And it seemsto me it gives you the opportunity to say whatever needs to be saidcome July. I would very strongly go with option III.MR. JOHNSON. My only concern about that was that it impliedthat we might have lesser reserve restraint if there was a markedslowing in money growth. I would say that we're so uncertain aboutthe money demand situation that I wouldn't want to imply that we wouldease if money growth slowed--even substantially. If we take out anyresponse to the aggregates, I would be happy with that.MR. PARRY. Are you saying that if money does not slow at allover the next six weeks and we have continued [high] growth rates,that you would not be of a mind to make a move?MR. JOHNSON. That would depend on whether we are seeingsomething happen in the economy by then.MR. PARRY. I think that's really where the difference is. Ithink there are some people who say they would. I think that's adifference of substance.-32-5/20/86MR. JOHNSON. Well, everybody will have a different opinion.I am just saying that's my opinion. I would want to see if theeconomy was catching on as a result of this M1 growth that we havehad. The base is not really doing anything. There has been biggrowth in M1 and I would like to see if that is catching on or ifpeople are just deciding to save out of those other checkable depositsor what is happening. In July, [unintelligible] if things were reallystarting to catch fire--if orders data and leading indicators werelooking a lot stronger--I would say that would be a good indicationthat money was being used more for transactions than we had thought atthis point.MR. MELZER. You weren't doing this, but I think it'sdangerous to draw a parallel between now and year ago when we hadsimilar problems. The reason I say that is that interest rates aredown a heck of a lot more than they were a year ago, the dollar isdown, and oil prices are down. In a sense it's easy to slip into themode, in general, of thinking that this is exactly where we were ayear ago. I am not sure we are because of those other forces that areat work and what we may see down the road in terms of a possibleresumption in inflation. In my mind, it may not be as easy this timearound as it was a year ago, just from a market perspective point ofview, to abandon the targets. But I guess that's for July.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we ought to stay in aholding pattern and that means I favor alternative B, like everybodyelse. On the directive, I favor alternative II. I also favor beingneutral. And I see no conflict in being neutral with allowing themarket to know that we acknowledge what's happening with theaggregates without making a judgment; we just let the market know thatwe know this. I think not to do that would risk giving the wrongsignals. So, I would prefer alternative II. While I think we now areprobably closer to the time when we may feel some need to snug up abit, I would be careful not to give any indication to the market thatI felt that way, because it just might make it happen; it might giverise to something.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Like Mr. Parry, I am not so sanguineabout M2 and M3; and I guess the greatest concern that I have isreally even more with M3, where for Bob it was M2. The concern that Ihave about M3 relates to this question that Frank raised about liquidassets or whatever you call it. We have a situation right now wherethere has been a tremendous burst in longer-term financing; but wealso have a situation in which there has been a tremendous burst inboth intermediate- and short-term financing as well as the long-term,through which the banks' role in that process is one of a contingentsource of liquidity through standbys and guarantees and[unintelligible] and all of these other things. So, one of thereasons M3 looks so sanguine and indeed why liquid assets, or whateverthat is called, look so sanguine is because the nature of therelationship of the banking system to this process is different. Whatis there now is a very substantial and very rapidly growing contingentliquidity [unintelligible] on the banking system. And I think that issomething that bears on the way in which some of these broader-33-5/20/86measures of liquidity and financial expansion look. So, I put that ontop of Bob Parry's earlier argument. I for one am not so sanguineabout what M2 and M3 are telling us, and I am of the view that when wetake account of conventional liquidity plus what I would loosely callcontingent liquidity that we have kind of a paradox in that thecontingent liquidity--what [financing] could have to be produced--doesn't show up in a lot of the conventional measures we are used to.Another quick point: Though none of us may be very impressedwith Ml, and I am not either, I think it's worth noting that for thefirst time in months and months and months, people in the market arelooking at Ml both in the United States and abroad. Nobody is gettingalarmed or anything like that, but there is a change in that peopleare looking at it again. They are not reacting to it but they arelooking at it, and I don't think we should kid ourselves about thateither.As far as policy is concerned, I would certainly very muchput myself in the "B" camp. I also have a little bias in thedirection of the need to be more sensitive to the possibility of "B"with a bit of a bias toward greater restraint, or "C." I don't knowwhat is going to happen between now and the next meeting either, but Icertainly could envision a set of circumstances in which even in thatintermeeting period we might feel the need to snug a bit. Because Ifeel that way, I favor directive III. I think directive III, with acouple of modest word changes, can be made compatible with the pointthat Governor Johnson made, which I think has some validity, by makingthe first conditional sentence something like: "If such a slowing doesnot develop, somewhat greater reserve restraint would, or might, beacceptable in the context of a pickup in economic growth" and puttinga reference to the monetary aggregates in there. But the part that ismore important to me is the somewhat lesser reserve restraintsentence. The only thing that would move me in the direction ofsomewhat lesser restraint that I really can think of right now wouldbe if the balance of the quarter materialized in a way in which theeconomy itself were distinctly sluggish. So, I would either want toget rid of the lesser restraint sentence altogether or just have thatsentence limited simply to a distinctly more sluggish economy ratherthan all of this other stuff.MR. JOHNSON. That was exactly the point I was trying tomake. If the economy were showing a lot of strength--even if M1dropped off quite a bit and it indicated that the velocity reallywould rebound sharply--we wouldn't want to ease under thoseconditions. I agree with that, but the opposite applies too. Theeconomy could be growing strongly but if velocity were showingcontinued weakness, we wouldn't necessarily want to tighten.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. I favor alternative B and the number II statementof the directive, although I could take number III with both thesuggestions that Jerry has made with regard to saying something aboutthe aggregates. That is why I mildly favor II: because I don't wantto indicate at this point that we are turning our back on theaggregates or that we are not being watchful of them. I also agreeabout the change in the sentence on somewhat lesser restraint, because5/20/86I do think the one thing that could happen that might make me wantsomewhat lesser restraint would be a remarkably sluggish economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich, you can interrupt allthis unanimity for Alternative B.MR. WALLICH. Well, I don't have much [to say] for the "B"notion because of the problems about the situation. People are unsureabout [unintelligible], and that is particularly the situation--whenone feels unsure about the sensitivity of what one is doing--where itis better in that moment simply to go to "C." I know this could havea bad effect, but initially it will reduce some of the errors that onemight make if one began with "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want to tighten up a little?MR. WALLICH. Yes, and I have had a hard time coming to this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, with that exception, the easy partis alternative B. The difficult part is what that means. I haveheard considerable expression that the wording of the directive oughtto be changed, with only one exception. We have to look at thesecarefully to see what the difference is. Just to speak for myself, Iam not sure I am alarmed--if that would be a fair way to express it--over Ml. Three consecutive months of high numbers do give me a littlepause, however much I deemphasize M1. Even if I don't pay anyattention to it at all, this is a time for a little perking up of theears anyhow, particularly with some rumblings [unintelligible] in M2and M3, although not at a serious level as yet. I also have to agreethat it's very hard to see what would make us ease during this periodexcept reasonably clear signs of softness in business activity. Tosee M1 falling below the particular M1 number would not impel a greateasing at this point with nothing going on in the economy. However--MR. RICE. Who needs much more than 20 percent growth?MR. JOHNSON. I bet we could. I wouldn't want to, but Ithink we could.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll see what the salient differences arein these directives here. The first sentence is going to be the sameanyway--"maintain."MR. BOEHNE. I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if I might make asuggestion as to something that might make most people happy? Itseems to me that most people want some acknowledgement that Ml isovershooting but people--at least the majority--also want to betotally neutral about what we might do, in order to not tip the scalesone way or the other before the July meeting. One way to achieve thatwould be in--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't accept that as a premise.MR. BOHNE. All right. Well then, there is no use havingwhat I suggest.5/20/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Committee may decide that, but Ididn't think there was necessarily all that much unanimity that underno conditions would we change--MR. BOEHNE. Not under no conditions. What I meant was thatat this point we just don't bias the directive one way or the other.MR. JOHNSON. I do agree with that point. If we acknowledgethe overshooting of M1 growth, which may be appropriate, I think we atleast ought to balance our acknowledgement of the growth of M1 withthe two possible meanings associated with that growth. One is that wehave a big bulge in money demand for various reasons associated withlower interest rates, declining oil prices, and all those things. Butit also can mean the opposite; it could be a warning of too muchliquidity. We don't know right now, it seems to me, which one ofthose meanings to apply to it.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think Governor Johnson is right. Oneway to deal with that is just to drop the sentence at the bottom ofpage 12 in draft alternative II that says, "This action is expected tobe consistent with a deceleration in money growth over the balance ofthe quarter." If we just take that sentence out and then in the nextsentence drop "however," it simply acknowledges that we have had rapidgrowth. Then we could follow the numerical specifications by saying"somewhat greater or lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable"etc. It seems to me that that says: Look, we have overshot M1 and weare not sure what it means; we may respond one way or the other, butwe are not at this point saying which way we might go. We will waituntil developments unfold.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that's what we wanted to say, that'sthe way to say it. But I think a lot of people would not say that.MR. PARRY. I think I wouldn't want to say that. What Iwould want to say is that if money continues to grow, I have aconcern. I think you're saying that if money continues to grow youdon't have this concern until you see some other things occurring. Iam not so sure that I could support that.MR. JOHNSON. Well, we were just making an offering.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are a zillion contingencies asusual, but just on this point, I guess there is a question: Ifmonetary growth continued at the recent rates--I'm talking about allof the aggregates now--with Ml averaging about 15 percent if we userecent months, and M2 projected now for the second quarter at 9-1/2percent and M3 at 8-1/4 percent, are we highly neutral about thosegrowth rates or not? We had 13 or 14 percent growth in M2 in Apriland 11 percent in M3. Are we really saying that if growth continuedat that rate of speed, just looking at the monetary aggregates alone,that we're neutral?MR. PARRY. Well, it depends on what happens to the economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All other things equal at this point.MR. PARRY. But even there I have a problem because these arenot contemporaneous events. If one is expecting the real developments-36-5/20/86to follow what has happened with regard to the aggregates to someextent, then if we are waiting for that kind of confirmation and itoccurs, we may have to do a lot more later than we would like to do.MR. JOHNSON. Bob, I agree with what you are saying, but I amjust asking: How long have we been sitting around here waiting for thelags now? We have been watching.MR. PARRY. It's obviously closer.MR. JOHNSON. I don't know whether we are closer or not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how close we are, but I doknow that these rates of growth of the aggregates have picked upsubstantially from what they had been.MR. ANGELL. Isn't there some point in time that the Mlgrowth path in and of itself gets to be fast enough? Particularly ifwe are moving down the demand curve due to the interest rate declines,I would expect that at some point in time--that is, if interest ratesdon't drop--we ought not to be getting that kicker any more, so wewould expect M1 to decelerate. It seems to me that it's more logicalthat M1 is going to decelerate. The question is: How much? I guess Iwould like to have Jim's comments on that. How long after we bringinterest rates down do we expect to get the quantity demand responsejust due to the lower interest rate?MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think Don has the econometric resultsthat we used. There is a lot of uncertainty, but we have variousmodels. You are looking at the numbers, Don.MR. KOHN. According to the models, for what it's worth, theinterest rate effects would be expected to begin tapering off to acertain extent in May but mostly in June and then even more going out.We are not sure that the models have captured the interest rateeffects all that well, given that we're at levels of opportunity coststhat we have just never experienced before with respect to NOWaccounts. But certainly the pattern ought to be one of tapering off,and that's what we built into the paths.MR. ANGELL. Let's say you estimate that 5-1/2 percent of theM1's recent path might be explainable simply by the interest rateresponse. That response is going to disappear at some point in time.MR. PARRY. Governor Angell, I think we all agree that ifmoney begins to grow more slowly, we would have some degree of comfortin that. I think the first issue, and one where we seem to have somedisagreement, is what if it doesn't? What does that imply in terms ofwhat we say and do?MR. ANGELL. I want you to understand that if Ml begins togrow slowly, [unintelligible] if we get it down to the 5 percent pathafter we have been at 15 percent and we don't see any evidence. Wecan do all the talking that we want to about the economy's growthpath, but the hard evidence is that the economy is still on a 2percent real growth path. That's all the hard evidence we have. Ifwe don't have any evidence and we get into the third quarter and the-37-5/20/86third quarter still looks like 2 percent or drifting to 1-1/2 percentor slower growth, we've got to ease.MR. PARRY. Of course.MR. JOHNSON. Unless the inflationary picture--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] to hear you say that. Idon't know what the growth path is, but frankly I'm not sure there isall that much difference between II and III. The first point we mayconsider is: Do we expect whatever action we take here, which is notmuch change at the moment, to be consistent with a deceleration ofmoney growth? That's what we are told, as a simple forecast; and Iguess we would like to see it happen. If that doesn't happen, wemight tighten, depending upon the strength of business. That's themost important thing. I think that's what people are saying; but itis dependent upon the strength of business.MR. JOHNSON. The nub of the problem is that everybody startsguessing what growth rate that means. What's the third-quarter numberthat will make us do that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't rely upon a third-quarternumber which nobody knows.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I agree. That's what I am saying.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd need a variety of hard evidence--say,some pickup in orders, continued strength in housing, and automobilesales continuing strong. With regard to the projections of nextquarter's GNP there's a certain amount of skepticism, although thesecurrent indicators tend to get reflected in those projections. I amnot talking about fine tuning the language. It needs to be finetuned, but I would have thought that you captured the essence of whatpeople were saying. Yes, we do expect a deceleration [in monetarygrowth]; if that doesn't develop, we are going to be a bit worried butwe are not going to be worried enough to change things unless thedeceleration is accompanied by some feeling that the economy is [not]doing reasonably well. And the only thing that would make us ease, asnear as we can see now, is a clear sign that the economy is not doingwell relative to current expectations. If that is the essence of whatwe are saying we ought to be at both II and III have the [prima facieevidence] of that, or more than the [unintelligible].MR. GUFFEY. It seems to me that there is only one issue, Mr.Chairman, and that is whether or not we want to maintain some rangefor the aggregates, particularly as set out in alternative II--keepingM2 and M3 as the first targets and indicating that M1 is sort ofuncertain.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that could be incorporated in III.The difference in the wording as it starts out is not much insubstance, as near as I can see.MR. PARRY. To me the phrase "if such a slowing does notdevelop" was the one that made the difference.5/20/86MR. MORRIS. The one big difference is that I read III tomean that we are reemphasizing Ml, because in last month's directivewe emphasized M2 and M3 and then we noted that M1 was uncertain.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it was meant to reemphasizeMl; it's a recognition that M1 is the one that is growing at a jetpropulsion rate of speed.MR. GUFFEY. I read III as Frank does--that M1 is in some wayelevated.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have two different things: what's theinherent rate of Ml, which I don't think anybody is intending tochange here, and what is way out of line with respect to what wasexpected, which clearly M1 has been. It's like price and incomeeffects. It's a low-weighted aggregate way the heck out of line.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we could make some progressif we decide which draft we want to alter. Draft II has theaggregates mentioned and I slightly prefer to have the aggregatesmentioned. If we start from draft II, then let's make the changes.If everybody wants to start from draft III, okay, but I don't think wecan work from both of them at the same time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you're probably right.Let's start with one or the other; I don't think that there is thatmuch difference. I can alter in either direction.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We can put in anything we want withthe numbers. What matters to me is the kind of contingent operationalapproach between now and the next meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to start on II?MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. I am not really picky anymore. I would beworried if this were to be released immediately.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The first sentence is "maintain. Then"This action is expected to be consistent with a deceleration in moneygrowth over the balance of the quarter." That's a statement of fact.The next sentence is a simple statement of fact too. We could say "Inview of the rapid money growth thus far in the quarter and apparentweakness in velocity, the Committee anticipates faster growth in themonetary aggregates [than expected at the last meeting], particularlyfor Ml."MR. ANGELL. That would be fine.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, what numbers are we putting in therefor M2 and M3?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Alternative B would say 10 percentand 8 percent.MR. KOHN. Well, alternative B says 10 percent and 8-1/2percent for M2 and M3.-39-5/20/86VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 8 to 10 percent.MR. ANGELL. Alternative B says 10 percent; it would have tobe 9 to 11 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. M2 and M3 are expected to expand atrates in a range of 8 to 10 percent.MR. ANGELL. That's all right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a slight peculiarity in that itsays M2 and M3, and as it works out M3 is expected to be 8 percent andthe 10 percent is for M2. If we put in 8 to 10 percent, it soundsjust the opposite according to this.MR. BLACK. 10 to 8 percent!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The broader aggregates are expectedto expand.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would we say M3 and M2? This says"respectively;" you didn't mean that. We want to take out the word"respectively." M1 growth at an annual rate of--MR. ANGELL. 12 to 14 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are [unintelligible]?MR. PARRY. That is one of the nice things about alternativeIII.MR. RICE. Are you changing your mind?MR. PARRY. I never was off it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Growth at the fantastic annual rate of--.Have we ever had a quarterly growth rate that big?MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. MELZER. Nothing ever got written down this way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you say?MR. ANGELL. You had that happen in 1980.MR. MORRIS. Why don't we say "The behavior of M1 continuesto be subject to unusual uncertainty."MR. ANGELL. "Unusually rapid growth."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This illustrates the problem of--MR. JOHNSON. It grew about 13 percent all year last year.MR. ANGELL. No, 12 percent; it was 11.9 percent.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, 12 percent.-40-5/20/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is it?MR. ANGELL. 12 to 14 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 12 to 14 percent appears big[unintelligible].MR. ANGELL. There is no use denying it; it's there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the real problem is the next twosentences.MR. MELZER. With those kind of numbers there, I don't seehow we can give it symmetrical treatment.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Even with those numbers, I don't seeit as symmetrical.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just suggest that we pick upthe two sentences with some modifications from the other directive,and say "If the anticipated slowing in coming weeks does not develop,somewhat greater reserve restraint would or might be acceptable in thecontext of a pickup in the growth of the economy, taking account"--keep the rest of that. Then "Somewhat lesser reserve restraint mightor would be acceptable..."MR. MORRIS. Why don't we just eliminate that, Paul? Why dowe need to talk about less reserve restraint? I don't think that isone of the options we are considering now, is it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is all right with me if it isacceptable to others. I don't know; some people may want to put it inthere.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd only want it in if it is limitedto more sluggish economic [activity] or something like that. I wouldprefer it out, but if it were limited to "lesser reserve restraintmight be acceptable in the face of a distinct slowing in the economy,"then I could live with it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's work on the second sentence."Somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable should therebe"--do you want to leave in the marked slowing of money growth?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Money growth could be zero and itwouldn't hurt my feelings.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would be acceptable?MR. ANGELL. I am not sure of that.MR. RICE. Me neither.MR ANGELL. [Unintelligible] these aggregates[unintelligible] one path and it changed from 15 percent.MR. RICE. Because of the vagueness of it, you don't knowquite what it means. How much lower?-41-5/20/86MR. JOHNSON. And for how long? If it were just a month ortwo, I could stand zero, but--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In a six-week period, what is goingto make you want to ease?MR. RICE. I would be prepared to drop it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Somewhat lesser reserve restraint mightbe acceptable in the context of a marked slowing in money growth andpronounced sluggishness of economic performance."MR. ANGELL. That is right. That will be fine. I don't seewhat is wrong with the way that is stated. It says about the samething. Slower monetary growth than unexpected, especially of thebroader aggregates, and sluggish economic performance.MR. PARRY. "Pronounced" makes the difference.MR. MORRIS. How about using the word "only"? "It would beacceptable only in the context of--." ?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could say "it would be acceptableonly." Or "might" carries that.MR. ANGELL. "And pronounced sluggish economic performance."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sluggishness of economic performance.MR. RICE. Not "pronounced."MR. ANGELL. I like that better--"sluggishness."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now the previous sentence.MR. ANGELL. And a period after "performance," right?MR. JOHNSON. Are you going to strike the rest?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Somewhat greater reserve restraint"--doyou want to put "would" or "might" in there?SEVERAL. "Would."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --"be acceptable in the context of apickup in growth of the economy." Presumably if we did either,particularly easing--well, I'm not talking about some very minorthing--but if we wanted to make any pronounced move we'd have aconsultation anyway. Let's see now, reading from alternative II, "Inthe implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committeeseeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reservepositions. This action is expected to be consistent with adeceleration in money growth over the balance of the quarter.However, in view of the rapid money growth thus far in the quarter andthe apparent weakness in velocity, the Committee anticipates fastergrowth for the monetary aggregates, particularly M1, than expected atthe last meeting. M2 and M3 are expected to expand over the periodfrom March to June at annual rates of about 8 to 10 percent. While5/20/86the behavior of M1 continues to be subject to unusual uncertainty,growth at an annual rate of 12 to 14 percent over the period is nowanticipated. If the anticipated slowing in monetary growth"--do youwant to put in there "particularly M2 and M3"?SEVERAL. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "If the anticipated slowing in monetarygrowth does not develop, somewhat greater reserve restraint would beacceptable in the context of a pickup in the growth of the economy,taking account of conditions in domestic and international creditmarkets and developments in foreign exchange markets. Somewhat lesserreserve restraint might be acceptable in the context of a markedslowing in money growth and pronounced sluggishness of economicperformance." And then we have to stick in a federal funds rate here.There is a question of whether you want to make that 5 to 9 percent,which is centered on the present rate. We haven't changed that [6 to10 percent] forever.MR. ANGELL. 5 to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 5 to 9 percent sounds reasonable to me,but I think we ought to put something in the policy record that statespretty clearly that that in itself implies no change in policy,because the press picks that up as a change in policy. So long as weare clear about that: that this is a purely technical change to centerit around the existing rate. I think all this implies no change, aswe said. We aim [for borrowing of] around $300 million--recently it'sbeen below $300 million--as long as these monetary aggregates are sostrong. We are not going to move anything for some weeks unlesssomething very unusual happens. If we have a combination of continuedstrong growth in money and clear signs, whatever they are, of somepickup in the economy, we might consider snugging up a bit. If thatbecame significantly more than a $100 million [snugging], let's say,we'd certainly have a consultation. Is that all understood?MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to me that we are just notcertain at this point what is going to happen. It seems to me aslikely to be in one direction as another direction. If the economydoes grow slowly--does not pick up from the 2 percent path--the bondmarket is going to know as soon as we do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we ready to vote?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Melzer YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich No5/20/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Now, we had some question about theintervention that we might discuss for a moment. Do you want todiscuss this operational issue of yours, Mr. Sternlight? Somebodymentioned to me that you'd like to have a biweekly report.MR. STERNLIGHT. If I may take a minute on that, Mr.Chairman. The domestic account management has been submitting weeklyreports to the Committee since 1922, describing the week's open marketoperations and the market background against which they wereundertaken. While not best-sellers, they have provided a usefulcurrent review and an important historical resource when researchingpast developments. Since going to the two-week reserve maintenanceperiod a couple of years ago, it has occurred to us that a two-weekreporting period would also make more sense. This would provide amore meaningful time interval on which to report how we've gone aboutmeeting the Committee's reserve objectives which are set, of course,on a two-week time frame. Moreover, preparation of the report everysecond week should permit better use of staff resources to work onother assignments and possibly achieve staff savings. But I don'twant to dangle any hopes on this score, Mr. Chairman. Committeemembers will continue to get daily reports on actual Desk operationsand market developments and also a brief summary report sent outbefore each Committee meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To bring you up to date on one aspect ofthis dating from 1922: I don't remember just when, but when I was inNew York I once thought that it might be a good idea to drop theweekly report altogether and just report for the intervals betweenmeetings. But this is a half way [alternative]. It seems to make alot of sense, but I--MR. WALLICH. In some sense it would. I know not everybodyreads it--not even I.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just out of curiosity: How many members ofthe Committee read it? [Secretary's note: Quite a few hands went up.]MR. BLACK. All the time or just some times?SPEAKER(?). Most of the time.MR. JOHNSON. Once in a while.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is interesting. Well, I don't[unintelligible] for discussion. This seems not unreasonable. Itpasses conveniently into the reserve--MR. ANGELL. Two weeks makes sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It makes sense to do that. I think thatthe new schedule is accepted.MR. JOHNSON. I might request a slightly less technicalsummary--maybe even just a one-page executive summary that would justsort of [unintelligible].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is another historical aspectof this that should be mentioned that the Chairman didn't mention.-44-5/20/86There is more than one person in this room who at some point in hiscareer had the responsibility of drafting the weekly report. What isinteresting about that is that after having drafted it, no one waspermitted to read it.MR. ANGELL. Sounds appropriate to me!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's discuss this interventionquestion a little. I don't know if you really want to be operationalabout this, but some sense of the Committee's mood, I think, would beuseful. We have these concerns about the dollar from time-to-time,including quite recently, and the question of coordinated interventionto support the dollar arises. I think it is fair to say thathistorically, although the Committee has not been all that gung ho byand large, in many particular periods we have been more receptive tointervention on either side--certainly including for several yearsrestraining the rise of the dollar--than the Treasury has been. Isuppose one way of expressing this is that neither of us has chosen toact, although we have independent powers, when the other side has notbeen ready to act. If the other side is more reluctant than we are,we don't act. The most reluctant party has a natural advantage underthose conditions. But the question has arisen at times, just as inthe most recent context, as to whether there wouldn't be someusefulness in intervening. This question has not been pressed veryhard. Governor Angell may have some opinions of his own; he had amore detailed proposal. But the question arises as to how useful youthink this tool is and whether we should be sympathetic in the rightconditions--meaning a weak dollar in these circumstances--towardperhaps providing some support for the dollar. It is probably notrelevant right now in terms of our present decision, but at some timeit may inhibit us from being as easy in monetary policy as we wouldotherwise like to be for fear of its effects on the dollar. We maynot quite be in that mode right today, but we could be at some othertime--even in the [near] future, if the second contingency sentence inthe directive came to bear. How do you feel about that possibility?MR. JOHNSON. Can I ask you to clarify something for me? Iassume we are talking only in terms of sterilized intervention, sinceotherwise it would have a bearing on what we just did earlier.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hate to discuss this in terms ofresponding [unintelligible] sterilized or unsterilized interventionbecause I think we've got to make those decisions separately and expost. The intervention may be unsterilized but not in the technicalsense that the amount of the open market operation is governed by whatwe do in the foreign exchange market. It may coincide with a periodof easing and in some broad sense you can say it was unsterilized. Wehave this kind of separable decision. The contingency that mightarise--the one that I cited--is where we might be in at least aslightly easy mode and want to intervene in the opposite direction. Iguess it would be more than sterilized; in that particular case, itwould be--I don't know what the term is--"antiseptically sterilized."We would be putting money into the domestic market and taking it outof the foreign exchange market; we would be going in the oppositedirection. Call it "sanitized" or "insulated.""Ultra-sterilized"!-45-SPEAKER(?).5/20/86MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we might have some doubtsabout the U.S. economy, but there is a lot out there that tells usthat the Third World is [unintelligible] debt. [Given] Japan's andGermany's growth rates, it seems it would be very desirable to havesome further easing of monetary policy in Japan and Germany, and Ijust don't think we ought to give up. I don't think we ought to givethem what they want, which is a little help on intervention, withoutgetting a step from them. I am not willing to do it unless they makethe move we want them to make.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are putting it in a negotiatingcontext, which could arise, but I don't know whether I absolutely wantto limit the question to that context. One of the difficulties inworld economic situations generally is that appreciation in theircurrencies, in fact, tends to depress their economic growth in theshort run. One other reason you get as much weakness there as you getis because their currencies have appreciated so much that theirbusinessmen have not been as eager, at the margin anyway, to expand asthey otherwise might be. And that tends to support an idea that goesin your direction, in terms of some kind of trade-off, at some point.MR. JOHNSON. The only question I have on the point that youmade is that you have to be clear what you mean. Does "somecoordinated intervention" mean we are talking about a slighttightening of monetary policy here to support the dollar while theylower their interest rates? I am not sure we want to do--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] forecast. I am thinkingprimarily of intervention to support the dollar. If we weretightening monetary policy here, however slightly, one ordinarilywould think narrowly that that might strengthen the dollar a little initself and we wouldn't have to intervene. We wouldn't have anyinterest in intervening on that side. I think the more operationalcase, although it is not the case right at the moment, would occur ifwe were running quite an easy monetary policy or easing further, or ifmonetary policy were unchanged and the dollar was declining anyway,making them unhappy. We would be raising some questions ourselves; wemight want to intervene to support the dollar. One could imaginecircumstances--let's say we were tightening policy [unintelligible] orfor other reasons the dollar was strengthening. I [don't] think thatis immediately ahead, but who knows? We might want to intervene onthe other side.MR. PARRY. This intervention is not directed at somemomentary instability in the market? You are talking about somethingto change the direction of the currency?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not talking about massive operations.If we have a massive operation, that is another kettle of fish.Presumably we couldn't leave that alone anyway until [unintelligible].I think of it more as a change in the kind of attitude we have towardintervention. One particular reflection of that might be if thesituation arose the way I described; that might make it operationalbut there might be other contexts too.MR. STERN. At the margin, another tool in the kit seems tome to be a good idea as long as it is going to be sterilized most ofthe time. I don't think we ought to expect a lot out of it, but it5/20/86certainly may have some signal effect, sentiment effect, or somethinglike that. It strikes me as a good idea.MR. JOHNSON. I have no objections as long as it isconsistent with the monetary policy agreed to by the FOMC. I wouldthink that we would have to cash those chips in few and far between tomake it a credible change. It would have to be a moment that wasreally creating the right psychological impression.MR. MELZER. In a sense, to have any fundamental impact inthe long run, it would have to be unsterilized and run fundamentallycounter to the policy--in talking about the situation you described.MR. ANGELL. The foreign exchange market may have beensomewhat dominated in recent months by market uncertainty as towhether or not our policy leaders in the United States would prefer alower dollar. It seems to me at this point in time, [given] the timelags that we have in regard to knowing what we have accomplished, thatit is not a desirable move for us to have an appreciably lower dollarand [we should] take away that question of uncertainty. Right nowsomeone thinks someone is going to try to push it lower. Just takingthat away might create a more stable climate, which would give us moreoptions.MR. MELZER. You said we could take that away unilaterally.It would have to be in the context of the agreement with the Treasury.MR. ANGELL. I think that's [unintelligible] maybe.MR. MELZER. In which case there might be so much confusion--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] could have a big fightabout it. More generally, putting the question operationally, therehave been times in the past when, quite on its own, the Open MarketCommittee was not very eager to intervene and--to exaggerate a bit--had to be dragged kicking and screaming to the table. I don't sensethat such an atmosphere exists now, under the appropriatecircumstances, but I want to confirm that. That's just the broadestway to put it. A more active mode in which to put it is to take oneexample, one Wayne took: If we see a positive desirability of doing itif we can get something out of the [other countries], that is onepossibility.MR. BOEHNE. I think Gary has said it right. It is an extratool in the kit. There may be times when we can use it in the bestinterests of the United States and we ought to do it.MR. GUFFEY. But in very modest amounts.MR. JOHNSON. I am still unclear as to what we mean by that.Does that mean that we would let the funds rate drift up through ouractive intervention to strengthen the dollar?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Barring some other decision, I think wewould conduct a net of open market operations, domestic and foreign,to meet whatever the Committee decided upon.5/20/86MR. ANGELL. Roger, I remind you that we don't have a greatbig stock of yen. We don't have as many as I would like us to have;I thought we should have bought more in 1984, but--. So, we are notgoing to intervene a whole bunch because we don't have that many yento take profits on. But it might come time to take a little profit--MR. PARRY. The purpose of this is to communicate to themarket what we think--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that clearly would be one possiblepurpose; another would be the kind of thing that Wayne described.Independent of that, if we really thought the weakness of the dollarwas constraining what we wanted to do in reserve provision, we mightwant to send out signals. Whether that would be very powerful or notwe don't know. But would it be useful to send a signal that says:"Yes, we are worried about the dollar"? If we want to ease anyway, wecould try to give ourselves room to ease by giving a counter signal onthe dollar. It might not work.MR. MELZER. That is the problem I have with it in thefundamental sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in some fundamental, theoretical,sense we would be moving in opposite directions. It might not work.But, given the importance of psychology in particular instances in themarket, one can make a case for trying.MR. MORRIS. In this particular market context, I thinkconcerted intervention would have an impact--at least in my judgment,based on watching the market--whether it's sterilized or unsterilized.MR. ANGELL. Well, at this moment in time, if the Japanesewere to cut their discount rate 1/2 point, and the Germans cut theirsand we didn't cut ours and we said [unintelligible] at the same time,I don't think you'd have to worry about an impact. I think themarkets would take note of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's easy. But in the other case,suppose they didn't ease their policy and we were still stuck and wewanted to ease or not tighten and the dollar was weak. Let's put itthat way: We weren't very eager to tighten or we wanted to tighten aslittle as possible, and they are not doing anything, and the dollar isa pain--MR. ANGELL. Oh, you might make the gesture. I'm not sure;you might change the psychology slightly for a bit, but--MR. JOHNSON. Well, we'd only get away with this once in myopinion. And we'd have to do it in conjunction with some supportstatements by all parties, it seems to me, instead of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that obviously would help. But wecould--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm not sure about that, as a matterof fact. If you take it to that extreme where you've got to havestatements and all the rest of it, then it certainly only would workonce. I think there probably are very narrow windows of opportunity-48-5/20/86when Mr. Cross can sneak in and out of the markets, maybe with somehelp from the Japanese or something without having to go through thattribal rite, that can at least create a pause at a time that's right.And we're not going to have--MR. CROSS. I think there have been some occasions recentlywhen--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The recent past.MR. CROSS. --the market was very sensitive to such a thingand it could have had considerable influence.MR. ANGELL. [Unintelligible] an impact.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, well--MR. MELZER. It seems to be in the realm of possibility,doesn't it?MR. CROSS. Yes.MR. ANGELL. Your insurance goes to those people who want totake comfort in being short in the dollar.SPEAKER(?). You're underscoring too many risks in themarket.MR. PARRY. What I'd like to ask Sam about is this: If youhave a situation where the French and the Germans and the Japanese didnothing and we eased policy and we intervened, I have the feeling thatthe New York traders would sell dollars.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They might.MR. CROSS. That could surely happen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're right. In all thesecircumstances, that would probably happen. But the question stillremains: Would they sell a little less eagerly and actively if we weregiving this contrary signal?MR. PARRY. Well, if they think that it's going to come backto a natural rate then you're giving them even more profit because youtook the dollar up. They'll sell and then [unintelligible] down.Right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe, maybe not.MR. PARRY. Traders very often have bet against interventionbecause intervention hasn't been very successful.MR. CROSS. There are too many possibilities and too manysituations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] judgment at the time asto whether you're going to be. And it's very hard to--5/20/86Mr. JOHNSON. I do agree there are rare opportunities when itcould be useful.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I agree with Sam. If youthink about the last six weeks or so--maybe the last two weeks inparticular--there may well have been a point or two in that time frameof the last six or eight weeks where we might have been able to sneakin there with the Japanese or with the Germans, or both, and get somestuff done without having to go through--MR. GUFFEY. I have a hard time envisioning, under thecurrent circumstances, that we would do intervention withoutcoordination with the Germans and the Japanese.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, right now, the direction we'retalking about we would get coordination with them.MR. GUFFEY. At least you'd have the up and up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll give you one not very far removedtype of hypothesis--a situation that did arise a couple of weeks ago.Suppose we were sitting right in the posture we're sitting with and,say, we don't want to move at the moment--we want to wait for a littlemore evidence of monetary growth or an improved economy. Yet we havea little tendency in that direction as time passes, but the dollargets very weak in the meantime. So it begins forcing that decisionsooner than we otherwise would want to do it. We might say: "Well,let's try a little intervention in here because we don't really wantto take that step toward tightening but we're getting a littleconcerned, or more than a little concerned, about the dollar." Itmight work or it might not work. But I guess the question is: What dowe lose by trying to buy a little time at the very least by doing theintervention?MR. PARRY. But [unintelligible] with the fundamentals.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, except unresolved fundamentals. Wego against; we might be doing it in the future. We're not going toget into fundamentals.MR. PARRY. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that is more or less where we are now.The dollar is weak at the moment. We're slightly biased in what wesee for the future but we're not very eager to have to respond bygeneral monetary policy to a pronounced weakness in the dollar. Inthat particular situation, apart from this negotiating Waynesuggested, is that the right time to be quite willing or--dependingupon the situation--even eager to intervene?MR. JOHNSON. Another--it may not [unintelligible]--primeopportunity later would be this: If it does so happen that theaggregates are growing strongly and the economy is picking up quitesubstantially and we literally do decide in July or whenever that infact we need to tap the brakes a bit, it would be a great opportunityto use that decision to buy dollars and--even though we're going to doit anyway--if Germany and Japan still are dragging their feet onstimulating their economies and it's clear that we are alone, we could-50-5/20/86offer to support the dollar and see if that might lead to a bettersituation with the Germans and Japanese.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Given all the permutations andcombinations, I think I got about as much guidance as I could get inthe absence of specifics.MR. FORRESTAL. Does the question arise because there hasbeen a shift in the Treasury's sentiment about intervention?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the question arises because therehasn't been any shift.MR. JOHNSON. They too--MR. ANGELL. Well, of course, I have some concern here thatintervention ultimately is a monetary policy decision. I'm verysympathetic with Bob Parry in regard to that. I don't like to loseanything. Whenever you start off and do something you prove you'regoing to lose, I don't think that helps you. Personally, I would tendto prefer not to intervene on a sterilized basis unless I were willingto make a monetary policy adjustment relative to the two othercountries. It just seems to me that the Secretary of the Treasury hasbeen the person carrying the ball here on this topic. And it'ssomewhat of a monetary policy topic, so I think maybe it's appropriatefor the Federal Reserve to have the Chairman speaking on some of theseissues from time-to-time. I'm somewhat encouraging him in thatdirection.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that this conversation isinconsistent with that. I'm not sure how we would come out on aspecific [proposal], but I think we've probably gone as far as we cango in the absence of something specific. If there's nothing else, wehave a meeting in July. We may have a consultation before that ifsomething happens. We can go eat lunch.END OF MEETING