Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 8-9, 1986A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 8, 1986, at 3:00 p.m., and continuingon Wednesday, July 9, 1986, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. GuffeyMrs. HornMr. JohnsonMr. MelzerMr. MorrisMr. RiceMs. SegerMr. WallichMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, 1/ Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Kohn,Lindsey, Prell, and Siegman, Associate Economists1/ Attended Wednesday session only.7/8-9/86Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director forMonetary and Financial Policy, Board of GovernorsMrs. Danker 1/and Mr. Struckmeyer, 1/ Economists, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Broaddus, Ms. Greene, Messrs. Lang, Rolnick,Rosenblum, Scadding, Scheld, Thieke, and Ms. Tschinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofRichmond, New York, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas,San Francisco, Chicago, New York, and Atlanta,respectivelyMr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof BostonMs. Lovett, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New York1/ Attended portion of meeting on Tuesday and Wednesday related toconsideration of the Committee's longer-run objectives formonetary and debt aggregates.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJuly 8-9, 1986July 8, 1986--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can proceed. We need somebodyto move the minutes.MR. GUFFEY. So moved.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No objections. Ms. Greene.MS. GREENE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or comments?MR. MELZER. What would be the likelihood of continuedofficial intervention? I think in the intermeeting period it wasabout How would you characterize the size of that? Isthere a willingness to continue to intervene on that scale?MS. GREENE. Well, the figure that you cited was a3-1/2-month total for the Bank of Japan. The purpose of theintervention on Monday and Tuesday was to demonstrate that they feelas strongly after the election as they did before that it isinappropriate [for the yen] to appreciate any more. So, I wouldimagine that they would still be active in the exchange market.Whether they would have to do the magnitudes that they have done oncertain days in the past, I don't really know.MR. TRUMAN. That figure is more than just the [interventionby the] Japanese; it includes all of the industrialized countries.MR. MELZER. That was just for the intermeeting period?MR. TRUMAN. That includes everybody; it includes theEuropeans--the French purchases and the Norwegian.MR. MELZER. Is the scale of that intervention anextraordinary amount for the six-to-eight week period of time?MS. GREENE. For the intermeeting period, that is a fairlylarge amount.MR. BOEHNE. This goes beyond operations, but what is themain case, if one is [speaking for] Japan, for not easing monetarypolicy in Japan?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can recite the case. But if you ask mewhether it's convincing at the end of the day I am never veryconvinced, though the individual arguments are stated with great forceand clarity. They say consumption is rising pretty rapidly and thediscount rate is at a postwar low. That is always presented as numberone. They say: We have reduced the discount rate three times so farthis year and it is at a postwar low; consumption is doing prettywell; there are reasonably favorable reports about the rest of the7/8-9/86economy and we're happy; money supply is over the targets and thenontarget target.MR. BOEHNE. What about the Germans?MR. RICE. What about GNP?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the transitory development.MR. JOHNSON. Over the year, though--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In Germany the arguments are more or lessthe same. Germany, I think, can make a much better case. There is alot more evidence that the economy could pick up. They have goodinvestment survey figures, up above 10 percent in real terms;consumption was strong in the first quarter; and real income was wayup and they say consumption is bound to be strong. They had a weakconstruction sector, but that's over now. They feel there is not muchthey can do about monetary policy; anyway, they are above target.MR. BOEHNE. What is your impression of the strength offeeling about further appreciation of either the mark or the yen inthose respective countries?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's my feeling about the likelihood?MR. BOEHNE. No, what is your feeling about how strongly theJapanese and the Germans view a further strengthening of their owncurrency?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they wouldn't like it, but relativeto easing monetary policy, I don't know. They have expressed noeagerness to ease monetary policy. If our exchange rate got weakenough, that would obviously be an influence but they are not going tointerpret it as another [unintelligible] this summer. It is goingto--MR. MELZER. I have another question. You mentioned thediminishing willingness to hold longer-term dollar-denominatedsecurities particularly--I believe I heard that correctly in yourremarks. What evidence of that have we seen?MS. GREENE. I think what I said was that the interestdifferential has narrowed to 50 basis points against Germany and 250basis points against Japan. I will defer to my colleague to the rightas to whether or not he has seen any--MR. THIEKE. Well, there have been less substantial inflowsthan was the case around the May refunding, to be sure. And to theextent that there have been inflows, they have been moving in a littleshorter on the maturity curve--more into the 7- and 10-year area--inpart because of the anomalies that are still at work at the very longend of the government yield curve.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Also, there is continuingdiversification into non-Treasury [securities], presumably in a searchfor high yields.7/8-9/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions or comments? If not,we will turn to Mr. Thieke.MR. THIEKE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the interest of completing my answer toMr. Boehne, the Germans have the argument that they are low in theEMS; they are a little less low than they were even a few days ago.Both Germany and Japan are relatively low. They say the recentinflation performance is just temporary and they have to guard againstthe relative resurgence of inflation.Any questions of Mr. Thieke? Any comments, observations? Ifnot, we have to ratify the transactions for a period marked byremarkable closeness to the borrowings target throughout the period.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Accidents will happen!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Messrs. Kichline, Prell, and Truman.MESSRS. KICHLINE, PRELL, and TRUMAN. [Statements--seeAppendix.]MR. BOYKIN. Jim, on your $16 a barrel [price assumption foroil], does that mean an average or the price at the end of theforecast period?MR. KICHLINE. To be explicit, we assumed something like $14or $15, and it gets to about $16 by the fourth quarter of this yearand just stays there. It creeps back up by the end of this year andsits there.MR. PARRY. The small decline in inventory investment in thesecond quarter has a very important influence on the strength andpattern of growth in the second half. The April numbers certainlywould support that kind of conclusion. In terms of the productionnumbers for May and what you anticipate for June and the personalconsumption expenditures for May, do you think that you might see aneven greater reduction in inventory investment than what you have inthe forecast? Would you be more optimistic?MR. PRELL. We approached the second-quarter projections fromtwo sides, adding up all of the available expenditure data we couldfind--and for inventories that's very limited, given that we have[only] partial data for May in a lot of the real sectors. On theother side, we look at the labor input that we have. The labor inputsuggests a rather slow growth, pretty much in line with our forecast.The expenditure data are a mixed bag and we come out in the endfeeling that that's reconciled with this kind of slight moderation ininventory investment. As we look at the industrial sector, we try toguess what's coming in from abroad, and that's very difficult to say.I think what is important for the outlook is that even thoughautomobile inventories still seem rather high, the manufacturers seemintent on continuing to produce at a fairly high level. They have allof the parts and they will run them out through the end of the modelyear. In other areas of the economy, manufacturers' inventories havedeclined and don't seem to be a great impediment to growth. We justfeel that in the trade sector, in retail trade particularly, there is7/8-9/86some hint of weakness so that ordering may be a little on the slowside there for a bit. But it shouldn't take a major correction.MR. PARRY. But the PCE expenditures for May, at least atsome point I hope in that area [unintelligible].MR. PRELL. Indeed.MR. KEEHN. Jim, I hear all the adverse comments about thestaggered effects of the introduction of tax reform. I think you saidthere was a one percent effect next year.MR. KICHLINE. It's one quarter of a percent on our estimateof real GNP growth. But I should say that that comes about--and is alower figure, I think, than in some outside forecasts--because wedon't assume that the Senate is going to end up with $23 billion netadditional [cuts] in 1987 and that we still get all of the Gramm-Rudman cuts. In fact, we think there is going to be some interactionand slippage in that process, so that by the time it comes out itwon't be that much of a cut. So we have a limited effect. But don'tlet me interrupt. I think your point is that concern in the businesscommunity seems to be growing over time. Earlier on, there was asense of uncertainty in some sectors; but now I believe there is agreater realization that the tax reform is going to affect thebusiness sector at large--assuming that it comes out something likethis Senate plan.MR. KEEHN. Well, that was the point I wanted to make. Ialso wanted to ask a question. It seems to me that we have done thisbefore: We have introduced tax legislation on a staggered basis and,if I remember correctly, the economic effects were a little moresignificant than what you are suggesting, weren't they?MR. KICHLINE. Are you talking about ERTA, going back toabout 1982 or 1983?MR. KEEHN. Yes.MR. KICHLINE. Yes, but I think the fiscal effects werelarger. What we have done, rightly or wrongly, is come up with afiscal package effect that is about $7 or $8 billion more than we hadpreviously, as a result of some additional outlays and somewhat fewercuts elsewhere. And it has a depressing effect on the businesssector, particularly, with an assumed given rate of growth of M2. Weassumed with the cutback in demand from the business sector, inmultifamily structures particularly, that there would be some interestrate effect; rates come down a little from what we had in the lastforecast. So, you get a little more spending elsewhere, and net whatwe have is something that is sprinkled through the projection. Idon't think it is an overwhelming feature, given the basic character[of the tax reform]. But if you assumed something like what happenedin 1982, when depreciation schedules were changed as were other thingsthat produced a much larger fiscal impact, then it probably would havea greater damping influence.MR. KEEHN. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.7/8-9/86MR. STERN. I would like to explore the other side of that abit. Suppose we got substantially less restraint than you areassuming in your forecast? Have you done some sensitivity analysis orsomething that calculates what that does to the forecast?MR. KICHLINE. I didn't this time. We have done a good dealof that in the past. The general sense is that the models have agreat deal of difficulty handling this, as you know. And that's whereI see a little uncertainty, partly because what is built into thecurrent interest rate structure is expectations that something isgoing to happen. If you remove that and you get a backup in interestrates, you get all sorts of effects that are not easy to capture--atleast in the models that we deal with. Basically, in a standardsense, we would assume that you would have a fiscal multiplier that issomewhat larger; how much larger is always open to question. But ifyou had federal spending that was lower by something like $20 billion,at an annual rate, that would give you something larger than that interms of its impact on the economy. And $20 billion is about 1/2percent in real GNP. So, I think there is a lot of uncertainty here.What is basically essential to our forecast is to assume that therewill be some fiscal restraint. However that comes about may be a veryinteresting question between now and October.MR. RICE. Mike, I think I heard you say that tax reformwould have the effect of broadening the tax base of state and localgovernments. How is that?MR. PRELL. Well, state governments in particular. Around 30states, as I recall, have a tax form on which the state's tax ratesare applied to the same income concept as the taxable income, oradjusted gross income, that is on one's federal tax return. With thechanges that are contemplated in personal income taxes--with fewerdeductions and so on--that number will be larger. Thus, unless thestates lower their tax rates, they will experience an increase in therevenues they derive from income taxes. There is already somediscussion in some states about preventing that from occurring. But Ithink as time progresses and they look at what their budgets aredictating in terms of revenue needs, undoubtedly some of it will beretained. That's implicit in our forecast. It's a minor element.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. Yes, I have a question for Mr. Truman. One ofthe things that I think has had a big impact on our import demands hasbeen the failure of the values of currencies in Korea, Singapore, andTaiwan to change relative to the dollar. What are you anticipating inthe forecast with regard to these areas, and what impact is thatlikely to have on our import demands?MR. TRUMAN. We have looked at that quite carefully inputting together this forecast. In the past we focused on the majorindustrial countries' currencies because, in general, the othercurrencies moved with them enough that it didn't make that muchdifference. What has happened since early 1985 is that the dollar hasdepreciated a lot against [the currencies of] major industrialcountries and depreciated [less] against [the currencies of] thedeveloping countries as a group--less so against Asian countries andagainst Latin American countries, but with a big weight going in there7/8-9/86for Mexico. In the forecast, therefore, we have deliberately tried toadjust that out, in terms of slowing the rate of decline that normalmodels--based upon just industrial countries' currencies--would tellus regarding how much import volume would or would not respond. Wealso tried to adjust that out on the export side. It's prettydifficult. Quite frankly, we don't have enough experience to do that.But we have given the size of the exchange rate change againstindustrial countries' currencies a lot of adjustment in the forecast,trying to take account of this factor as well as somewhat relatedissues like how fast prices change and how fast we get a response[unintelligible]. That's one of the reasons why we get such fairlymodest numbers; you may have noticed the numbers I quoted are quitemodest [unintelligible] relative to what you might have thought.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Just a follow-up to that question: Have youconsidered that the imports from these emerging industrial countriesaround the Pacific Basin are really substitutable for what may notcome in from Japan and other countries against whose currencies thedollar has moved substantially?MR. TRUMAN. That clearly is a factor and I think we havetaken that into account. We haven't done, and I am not sure one cando, a close analysis of the [various] imports--to the extent, forexample, that Korea is different from India in terms of what it canproduce and [unintelligible] imports. There is an offset that I thinkone ought to recognize: It also is true that Korea is not going tobuild up big surpluses. To the extent that it is exporting more tothe United States and the rest of the world, it also is importingmore; and to the extent that we are also exporting to the Koreanmarket we have a competitive advantage vis-a-vis Japan on exports,including the amount of raw materials and that kind of thing, which isnontrivial, that we traditionally have [unintelligible].MR. GUFFEY. But that beneficial effect may lag somewhat?MR. TRUMAN. It will come later. But eventually we are goingto gain somewhat in operating in some of these Third World marketsfrom the fact that we have depreciated vis-a-vis Japan and Germany.In fact, you can see the other side of what seems to be a block inLatin America and Asia with the dollar's appreciation: As the dollarmoved up against all of those currencies we lost.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I want to follow up on that same point too.It's still hard for me to understand how in the forecast you can getrising prices in the out years, both domestically and abroad, whencurrencies--especially the G-10 currencies--are appreciating relativeto the dollar. I see how you can draw a scenario where prices tend tocome back a little in the United States as a result of theappreciation of the dollar, with a lag as oil prices level off. Istill don't understand how you can get the same trend abroad withappreciation in their currencies relative to the dollar, especiallywith the fact that their currencies are appreciating even moredramatically relative to the non G-10 currencies against which the7/8-9/86dollar is also appreciating. So, I am having a rough time with thatscenario.MR. TRUMAN. The response is that for the G-10 countries as awhole the difference between QIV inflation rates is 2.7 percent versus2.9 percent. Now, the chart here is a little exaggerated because thehigher inflation countries continue to go the other way and are leftout of the chart. Switzerland, for example, goes down next year andis left out; [unintelligible] is left out of here. So you have a verysmall effect and that is coming from the fact that oil prices stopgoing down and the exchange rate--although the dollar continues todepreciate, it's not at a 30 percent annual rate.MR. JOHNSON. 10 percent.MR. TRUMAN. It is something like an 8 percent annual rate,so that is what [unintelligible]. I don't--MR. JOHNSON. It still seems to me that it would be going theother way.MR. TRUMAN. I have quoted you the wrong set of numbers--theGNP numbers. It goes up, but one of the points is that for the G-10as a whole--Sweden is at 4 percent this year and goes down and Belgiumcomes in a little high relative to Europe, going up about 0.3 percent--it's a relatively small average drop. You have a bigger effect inJapan and Germany partly because those currencies have moved a lot andthe move was relatively large compared to the other currencies. Theonly point I would make is that the change is small relative to thechange in the United States; [the numbers are] 2.1 and 2.9 percent inthe G-10 [versus 1.4] and 3.9 percent in the United States.MR. JOHNSON. I agree. I just don't--MR. TRUMAN. It's the relative change that I think is moreimportant.MR. JOHNSON. It's small, but I don't even understand thedirection. I was checking.MR. TRUMAN. Well, wages are continuing to go up and thereare other factors.MR. PARRY. Isn't the impact of energy price developmentseven greater for them because it's a multiplier--MR. TRUMAN. You are multiplying--halving the dollar price ofoil and that times a 30 percent drop in the price of the dollar[unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. Maybe we ought to start over. I thought thatoil prices leveled out in this--MR. TRUMAN. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. And then against depreciating currencies--7/8-9/86MR. TRUMAN. But say that oil prices go down by 8 percent orgreater, say, 10 percent. Last year they had gone down about 50 or 60percent.MR. JOHNSON. But they are going down.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but other prices are going up.MR. JOHNSON. Above?MR. PARRY. There is less of an offset to the higherincreases in other components in 1987 than in 1986 and that can do it.MR. TRUMAN. But the year-over-year consumer inflation ratesin these countries are still positive and you can ask the samequestion even with price effects [unintelligible]. It has to do withthe other components in the price index.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have another dollar question for Mr. Truman. Ihave heard business people say that comparing the current value of thedollar to the absolute high back in February of 1985 tends tooverstate the amount of the decline in terms of how they benefit fromit. They say it is better to look at something like the current levelversus, say, the average for 1984 or the average for 1985 because theypoint out that they didn't do a lot of transactions at the exact peakof the dollar. So this comparison we use overstates the amount of thedeterioration and suggests more of an improvement than they, in fact,would be likely to get.MR. TRUMAN. [Unintelligible] I would agree with that. Whattransactions took place were [unintelligible] response to what wasgoing on as the dollar was moving up. That's one of the reasons forthe continuation of the effect. You count the negative effects onexport and import volume as they lag through the system; at the sametime, you begin to add on the positive impact and we don't begin toget much positive impact for a while. Look at it the other way: Thedollar started depreciating on this particular index from, call it 90in the fourth quarter of 1980, and it is now at 110. So it has gonefrom 90 to 150 plus back down to 110; that suggests that there is alot of appreciation that has not been wiped out. It's debatablewhether it needs to be wiped out completely anyhow, but it is clearthat the dollar has still appreciated relative to what was on averagethe last [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A lot of appreciation against the Canadiandollar.MR. TRUMAN. [Unintelligible] never appreciate that much.MS. SEGER. Also, I couldn't hear Mr. Kichline's comment.How much of a downward revision did you say we had made in ourcollective forecast for real GNP in 1986?MR. KICHLINE. In 1986? Are you referring to the last chart?7/8-9/86MS. SEGER. You have a summary of forecasts--I think it'schart 19 or something like that--where you show forecasts for real GNPof Board members, presidents, and staff. Sitting this far away, Ithought I heard you say something about the downward revision.MR. KICHLINE. I simply stated that nominal GNP now for 1986falls below the lower range of the central tendency. I was trying tosuggest that there has been a sizable downward revision both withrespect to the deflator and real GNP.MS. SEGER. Okay. Thank you.MR. BLACK. Jim, isn't that a typographical error on thatchart? Shouldn't it be "FOMC projections for 1986" instead of 1985?We are bad [forecasters] if it was for 1985 and we missed it thatmuch!MR. KICHLINE. [You are right.] This is a result of tryingto be cost conscious and using an old chart.MR. ANGELL. Well, Bob, it may be worse than you did! That'sone way to look at it.MR. BLACK. That's a thought!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have assaulted the staff with afew questions. I haven't heard anybody committing themselves to theoutlook at this point. I don't know whether we want to do that afterwe look at the long-run ranges. Why don't we put the long-run rangeson the table? Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]MR. MELZER. Don, I might ask a question that was triggeredby your statement. You used the phrase a couple of times "shouldinterest rates need to decline." Maybe this is a question for Jim,too. How would that be treated in the model? Would one be able tocontrol interest rates that effectively? There has been talk, forexample, of highly stimulated interest-sensitive sectors of theeconomy. How would a 50 or 100 basis point decline in interest ratesaffect GNP for 1987, for example, all things being equal?MR. KOHN. Well, I think Jim can answer that, but let me saythat my comments were really meant in the sense that our GNP forecastis considered consistent, as Jim and Mike both said, with ratesremaining around current levels. I was trying to deal with thecontingency that underlying demands were weak so that, in order toattain an acceptable rate of GNP growth, interest rates would have tofall; and GNP growth would be not stronger than we are projecting butaround the rate that we are projecting.MR. KICHLINE. We have done some simulations; we didn't dothe fiscal one, but we have done some monetary ones, basically usingM2. And in this particular simulation, if M2 were running at the topof the range--if M2 grew at 9 percent through 1988 beginning now--themodel result is that that would be consistent roughly with a federalfunds rate 3/4 percentage below what it is now, with that sort of7/8-9/86level maintained into 1988. You would get just a few tenths more realgrowth this year because of the lags but about a percentage point morereal growth next year and a bit more in 1988. On the price side withthat sort of scenario, prices don't change this year; they are up aquarter to one-half of a percentage point more in 1987 and, accordingto the model, up 1-1/4 percentage points over what they otherwisewould have been in 1988.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] the usefulness of themodel. Does anybody have any particular questions for Mr. Kohn? Havewe covered every contingency?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Don, in the first paragraph in theBluebook, you talk about the combination of factors that may beinfluencing Ml: lower interest rates on the one hand, and then a kindof potpourri of other things. I don't want to hear a model answer; Iwant a judgmental answer. How much weight would you give to theinterest rate factor in and of itself as opposed to the potpourri ofeverything else?MR. KOHN. I think the interest rate factor accounts for thebulk of the acceleration. I think we are getting more of an interestrate response than the models would indicate and in large measure thatis coming in the demand deposit component. A higher proportion ofdemand deposits is in compensating balances because some of thehousehold deposits are out; they were shifted into OCDs. Thecompensating balance responses to interest rates are very large. Inessence, it's one for one--an elasticity of one there. At the sametime, our investigation of some of the activity in the secondarymarkets--in mortgage markets in particular--shows that a considerableamount of demand deposits can be generated through refinancing,through the use of cashier's checks, and the advance repayments ofGinnie Mae's being put temporarily in demand balances before beingpaid out and passed through to security holders. I hesitate toquantify it; I don't think we can. But I do think that somesubstantial portion of the demand deposit group in particular isrelated to this huge pick up in financial activity, particularly inthe mortgage market. And our projection of a slowing of money growthover the second half of the year is predicated partly on the wearingout of these interest rate effects. But it is also predicated partlyon the presumption that with a more stable interest rate environmentthe volume of mortgage refinancings will tend to taper off as willsome of the other financial market activity. And that would help tobring down demand deposits or at least to level them off.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I remember that we went tocontrolling monetary aggregates very recently because we didn't knowhow to forecast what level of interest rates would be needed to getthe nominal GNP growth that we sought. Now I think we have come fullcircle because, as I hear Don tell it, in order to set a range for Mlwe have to forecast interest rates for the year. If that is the case,that raises a question in my mind whether it makes any sense for us toset a range for M1 when we don't know what interest rates are going tobe in the coming year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris, M1 emphasis led us away from[unintelligible] so we can go back to it. That gets to the questionthat I was going to raise. Maybe we can, if not resolve it, at least7/8-9/86begin to form some consensus on what we want to do with M1 in theselong-range targets. I am not so worried about what precisely thetarget should be if we have a target, but whether we should have oneor rebase it. Do we chose a new target for this year? Do we have onefor next year? Do we rebase this year, do we keep what we have, or dowe say we are going to be over it and eliminate what we have? Of thevarious choices Mr. Kohn gave you, what appeals?MR. JOHNSON. I kind of agree with Frank. I don't think wereally know how to set a target at this point for the rest of theyear. A lot is going to depend on interest rates and we are not surewhat is going to happen. I think that we ought to emphasize M2 andM3, which is sort of what we have done. I think we would be betteroff not setting a new target for [Ml] and playing Ml down whileemphasizing M2 and M3. I think that makes a little more sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are talking about 1986? What do youdo for 1987?MR. JOHNSON. Yes, 1986. A lot would depend, I think, onwhat we see in the demand for money by the end of the year. But ofcourse, we have to set a target now. We could make--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to set a target for something; wedon't necessarily have to do it for Ml.MR. JOHNSON. I would shy away even from 1987 at this point,saying that we might come back to it if we see velocity stabilize atsome point.MR. RICE. I would hate to see us drop the target range forMl. I would much rather see us retain a target range but announcethat we don't expect the growth to be within that range. This way wewould be facing up to the fact that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say just keep 3 to 8 percent this yearand say we are not going to be within it?MR. JOHNSON. Well, that is what I said. I didn't say dropthe target; I said maybe not announce targets for 1987 this year--notuntil we have a better look at what velocity is doing for 1987.MR. RICE. I would have no problem dropping it for 1987. Itwould be easier to drop it for 1987 than for 1986. I would prefer atthis time to keep 3 to 8 percent for 1987 too and change it later.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, that is the same. I don't mind.MR. RICE. But I would go along with dropping it for 1987, ifthere is a consensus.MR. WALLICH. Having it too high is one thing; but having ittoo low is another.MR. MORRIS. What is the value of having the range and thenannouncing that we are not going to be within it?-11-7/8-9/86MR. RICE. I think it conveys a sense of honesty. We aretelling the public what we think the range ought to be. Then we aretelling them that for reasons that are not altogether fully apparent,we are not going to make the target range. It is more honest to do itthat way.MR. MORRIS. Wouldn't it be more honest to say that therelationship between M1 and nominal GNP has become so unpredictablethat we are dropping it as a target rather than say we have a rangebut we don't intend to stay within it?MR. JOHNSON. I think there is some information in M1relative to M2 and M3. What we have seen is a runoff in bank CDs intoMl--to some extent a shift in savings from less liquid to more liquidform--and I think it is important to monitor that. I would be muchmore concerned about M1 if it were rising and M2 and M3 also startedmoving. It has some relative significance, but I don't know right nowwhether we could set a target and make any sense out of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I am afraid I won't do much more than join thediscussions that have already taken place. It seems to me that it ishonest to say, first of all, that M1 has [served us] quite well in thepast and perhaps will come back full circle to where there will be arestoration of some historical relationship between income and moneygrowth and we will want an M1 target again. As a result, I wouldprefer not to drop it but rather, as Emmett said, to be more honestand say we'll have a range for it but expect not to hit that range in1986--and I should think in 1987 also, unless there is a return tosome historical relationship. The Bluebook has the language that Ithink would be appropriate. It says that M1 [would be evaluated]depending on "developments in the economy and financial markets, andpotential inflationary pressures." That is the kind of explanation,it seems to me, that would be appropriate after we have said we don'tunderstand what has happened to M1. Therefore, I would opt to retainthe 3 to 8 percent range for 1986 and also for 1987, with theexplanation. We'll have another opportunity to look at it inFebruary.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. I am in favor of dropping the range for Ml--inparticular for 1987. We don't intend to meet it and we don't reallyknow--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You said particularly for 1987?MS. HORN. Yes, I favor not announcing a range for M1 for1987. As to how we handle 1986, I also favor not having a range.Whether we do that by actually eliminating the range we have alreadyset or by saying that it was set and we are not going to come withinit, I don't feel too strongly one way or another as long as we don'tannounce a range for 1987. I think it communicates that for themoment we have to step away from this. As you can imagine, I alsohave great hopes that we will come back to it one day.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.7/8-9/86MR. BLACK. I reach a rather different conclusion, Mr.Chairman. I think Don Kohn set a very good stage when he said thereal question was not what we do with M2 and M3 but what we do withMl. Even someone who has thought, as I have, that M1 has been soimportant has to admit that it has been behaving very strangely. So,I think it does deserve somewhat special treatment at this point; butI think it would be a decided mistake to downgrade it completely,since it is the aggregate that we can control better than any other.If we downgrade it, then that might jeopardize--and certainly would beperceived by a large part of the market as jeopardizing--our chancesof attaining our long-run objective of permanently restoring pricestability. I think we have to recognize that [prospective role] atsome point--that is, after the more normal relationship is re-established between M1 and the economy. With interest rates havingfallen the way they have, and with the general expectation that therewon't be a great deal of movement in the last half, I think we mightbe at the point where we begin to see those relationships resuming insome form or another. So if you buy that part, that gets to thequestion of whether to take these wider ranges beginning from thefirst of the year or whether to rebase. As they are set up in theBluebook, it really doesn't make a whole lot of difference so far asthe end point is concerned, because rebasing from 3 to 8 percentresults in a growth rate of 10.2 percent above the fourth quarter of1985 which would be sort of in the middle of these two alternatives--raising the ranges or rebasing back on the fourth quarter of lastyear. But to me it would be much more logical to rebase, because myguess is that this unanticipated further substantial decline in thevelocity of M1 in the first half of the year was due largely to thissharp decline in interest rates; and since we don't expect that tocontinue, to me it would make sense to sort of forgive that andrebase. But a second and more practical reason to rebase is that ifwe are going to move this range down over time, it is going to be alot easier--from a public relations standpoint--to move it down tosomething that eventually is compatible to price stability if we comedown from a rebased 3 to 8 percent than if we had 5 to 9 percent or 5to 10 percent and then suddenly said next year we want 3 to 8 percentor whatever it is we decide on. I would definitely rebase, and Ithink 3 to 8 percent might be a good place to put the range. And Iwould hope that in 1987 we could move it down somewhat from thatpoint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. I would be strongly against rebasing and alsoagainst changing the range. It seems to me that basically we have allconcluded that we don't know very much about the relationship betweenmoney and economic activity in the last 18 months, but moreimportantly, that we don't have much confidence that we will know allthat much more in the future. Consequently, it seems to me that themost honest thing to do is to leave the range for Ml where it is andsimply indicate, as is shown in the proposed language of variant I,that for 1986 we are leaving the range at 3 to 8 percent but we arenot going to pay a great deal of attention to it. As far as 1987 isconcerned, it seems to me that if you buy that--particularly if youbuy the idea that we are not confident of knowing what kind ofrelationship will exist between economic activity and money in 1987,then the choice is really an obvious one, and that is: Don't set arange. Because if we set a range--be it a range from a changed base7/8-9/86or whatever--it implies that we have some degree of confidence about areassertion of a predictable relationship between money and economicactivity. And I don't have that confidence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As far as the balance of 1986 isconcerned, I would couch M1 in terms of a monitoring range as we haveused that term in the past. In that setting, I would probably have amild disposition to have what I would call a realistic range for theyear, not rebasing it. But I could leave it at 3 to 8 percent too. Iprefer a monitoring range with a realistic range. I come out ratherdifferently in terms of 1987. I would prefer to have a target for1987 and I would couch the language for the M1 target for 1987 interms of suggesting that that range is based on the assumption of areturn to a more normal velocity relationship. And if that were notto materialize, I would demote it in February back to a monitoringrange. I have no strong theoretical persuasions about Ml or any M,but I am inclined to the view that, as sure as we sit here, the daywill come when we are going to want to have Ml. And if we completelydiscredit it to the point where nobody pays any attention to it, it issimply not going to be possible to resurrect it when it suits ourpurpose. So, I think we need some continuity there, but I would bequite flexible as to how to achieve it; certainly, for the balance ofthis year a monitoring range is fine.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, for 1986, I certainly would not like tosee us revise the range because doing that would imply a sense ofconfidence in what we think Ml should be later on in the year and Idon't think we have enough information, given the recent behavior ofMl, to have that kind of confidence. By the same token, I wouldn'tlike to see us rebase because by rebasing we, in effect, would beforgiving the growth of M1 that has taken place already. That, too,implies that growth in Ml was due to a one-time phenomenon that is nowgoing to be corrected. So, I think that rebasing or revising is notthe way to go. Nor would I think it desirable, given the history ofM1 over the past several quarters, to announce a range and then say weare not going to pay any attention to it--that we are going to overrunthe range for the rest of the year. So, I think the better course ofaction is to put this M1 aggregate on a monitoring basis. Now, maybethis is a matter of semantics. But some people have talked aboutdropping M1 and dropping M1 means discrediting the aggregate andsaying that it is over and done with--that we probably are not evengoing to look at it and we are not going to assimilate the informationthat it gives us. I think that would be a mistake and I would notlike us to do that. I would like us to do what we did about a yearago and that is to have it on a monitoring range, observe it, and takewhatever information it has but not set a range for it. I take itthat we don't have to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How can you have a monitoring rangewithout setting--?MR. FORRESTAL. Well, setting target numbers. I don't thinkwe have to set a public target for M1 if it is a monitoring range. Inany event, I don't think it ought to be a target in the sense that we-14-7/8-9/86have had it up until now. I'd put it on a pure monitoring basis for1986 and I would be inclined to wait for 1987 and not do anythingabout 1987 at the moment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. Well, I agree with the point that it is verydifficult, given Ml's recent performance, to come up with a range inwhich I would have much confidence. But having said that, I think wewould be well advised at this juncture at least to considerestablishing a range that we have some chance of hitting for thisyear, albeit perhaps a slim chance. In some sense, I think ourcredibility is a bit at stake if we continually run with somethinglike 3 to 8 percent and then acknowledge as quickly as we say that,that of course we are not going to hit it. That leads me to somethoughts along the lines of alternative I or II, as expressed in theBluebook, for the balance of this year. We obviously can achieve thesame thing with rebasing; I am indifferent as to whether we do itthrough rebasing or simply by establishing a new range that we havesome possibility of hitting. Obviously, alternative II is probablysomewhat more likely in that regard. One of the other advantages ofdoing that is that as we look ahead to 1987, if we establish a revisedM1 range consistent with alternative II, which was 6 to 11 percent, wecould at the same time consider a somewhat lower range for next yearwith all the caveats that have been appearing in our directives and inour ranges for several years--well, for at least more than a year now.In my mind, that would at least be a signal and demonstrate our intentto work toward price stability over time. So, I would favor somethinglike 6 to 11 percent for the balance of this year, with somethinglower next year for the purpose of moving in the direction that Ithink we ultimately want to go.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to get into just what therange should be at this point, assuming we have one. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that a midyear change in therange would make more important what we do not want to make moreimportant. The markets have already understood very well; theyhaven't had to have any guidance from us that we are permitting Ml togrow faster than the 3 to 8 percent range. So I think the less said,the better. Leave 1986 as it is. I would strongly endorse Mr.Corrigan's position that at some point in time--when, we do not know--inflation might once again return. You understand I say "return."And if it were to return, then velocity would behave in a mannerconsistent with those periods when inflation was a factor and it wouldbe very important for us to have the M1 tool ready to go. Myparticular preference would be for 1987--well, you don't want to talkabout percentages. But I do think it is important for us to have Mlin there. I don't think we need--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can make a vague statement about that.MR. ANGELL. Well, my vague statement would be that I wouldprefer for 1987 what you may remember I preferred for 1986: a 3 to 10percent range because we do not know at this point in time howvelocity is going to behave in the deflationary environment that weare in.-15-7/8-9/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that theimmediate problem is probably more one of form than of substance. Wetalk about honesty, and I guess that's in the eyes of the beholder. Iwould think that would be a straightforward change in the range--notdropping it and not rebasing it--to the money growth we wouldanticipate, much as Gary said. I would just do a straightforwardchange in the range at this point and say this is what we anticipateM1 will do--without having to say that it's a monitoring range or thatwe don't know what it's doing or that we are not going to be payingvery much attention to it. The numbers might look a little large--larger than we are used to seeing--but I would be prettystraightforward on that. For 1987, I would keep Ml; there again Iwould be inclined to make the best judgment we could about what moneygrowth numbers we anticipate, and I would construct the ranges aroundthem. Again, they might be a little large, but I would do that hereat midyear, because before we have to really settle on that early nextyear we would have the opportunity--if more normal relationshipsdevelop--to make an adjustment downward. I would rather go to the upside now and come down [later] rather than shoot low and have to goover. Those are good economic terms!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, I wouldn't change the range for 1986 or for1987, nor would I rebase for 1986, because I think for all thestatements that we could make, I would have very little confidence inany range or any base that we might choose. But I wouldn't drop theaggregate either for 1986 or 1987. I would think of the two periodsas a continuum; I would leave the target where it is for this year andreestablish the range at the same level for next year, but make itperfectly clear that we might expect the results to be at veryconsiderable variance with the target, and that in the interim periodwe are placing our emphasis on M2 and M3. I think [Jerry] made animportant point: that at some point these relationships are likely tocome back into line and that we are going to want to reuse Ml when wehave the confidence that those relationships have been reestablished.If we keep it in the menu, I think it would be easier to accomplishthat than if we drop it at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I really think our credibility with financialmarket participants would be enhanced by admitting what is obvious:that we don't know what is going on with M1 and we can't reallyexplain it. The relationship between monetary growth, as measured byM1, and economic activity has certainly broken down. Therefore, weare better off not coming up with a quantitative range becauseregardless of what we call it--a monitoring range or something else--the Fed watchers still look at the numbers and they still plot andcompare actual Ml figures to whatever range we have mentioned. Also,the media pick these numbers up and do the comparison regardless ofour warnings about how risky it is to make something out of it. Theystill do. I think we would be better off dropping it--maybe"dropping" isn't the proper term; maybe "putting it on ice" orsomething like that would be the terminology to use. I think we are-16-7/8-9/86just misleading people when we keep a numerical range for either 1986or 1987.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. I have gone back and forth in my thinking aboutthis. I wanted to hear some of the discussion here today. Ingeneral, I think it's very important that we have a narrow aggregatelike Ml. And I guess Ml is the best one we have right now because ofthe control characteristics and historically, anyway, the relationshipto GNP. Now, whether any of the work going on to come up with abetter narrow aggregate will pay off and we will come up with such anaggregate, I don't know. But for the reasons Governor Angell andPresident Corrigan cited, I would favor an approach that maintains thecredibility of M1 down the road should we need it. One thing thatconcerns me about either rebasing or increasing the growth ranges atthis juncture would be the implications that might be read into thatin terms of how policy would be conducted in the second half. Ifsomebody tore it apart and said: "Well, 6 to 11 percent looks like apretty broad range but that implies month-to-month money growth fromJune to December of less than 8 percent" we conceivably could besending a signal of tightening at a time when I don't think we want todo that. I think, politically, too many people are trying to jump onus right now in terms of policy, and [adopting] that range mightincrease that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just so I get it clear in my mind, is itliterally true that 6 to 11 percent implies 8 percent from now on?MR. KOHN. Eleven percent implies just about 8 percent fromJune to December.MR. MELZER. In any case, whether it is established as amonitoring range or whatever, I think there is potentially a problemin terms of resetting the range at this juncture that could reallyaffect the credibility of this aggregate down the road. In otherwords, we should only reset the target if we pretty much rededicateourselves to trying to meet that target. I don't think that we have acredibility problem with markets right now in terms of Ml; I thinkthey know we have been treating Ml differently. If we were just tosay that we are not going to meet the target and put it on amonitoring range through the balance of this year, that would notcreate a problem. I would agree with what Jerry said that we ought tohave targets for next year. I think that's important. We could seecircumstances where we will need the rationale to support a firming inmonetary policy and that likely would provide it. So, I would like toget from here to there maintaining as much credibility as we can forthe Ml aggregate or a narrow aggregate that might take its place.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I think the behavior of M1 is still going to beso [uncertain] that the main issue is whether it is a viable target,regardless of whether or not its growth is going to be very strong.[Unintelligible.] So I would argue, not to trust too much in what wecan do in terms of the M1 numbers, but to in effect [monitor it].[Unintelligible].7/8-9/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. I have two additional comments. With regard to1986, I would be reluctant to support either alternative I or IIbecause I don't have much confidence that they could be reached,particularly if for some reason we felt that a somewhat moreaccommodative policy would be appropriate in the shorter term. Thesecond point relates to a comment Jerry made. I agree with Jerry thatwe should have a target for M1 to operate on in 1987. But please keepin mind that this is July of 1986, and what we basically could besaying is that we are not specifying a target in July because we donot have enough information. One could certainly address that issuefor 1987 at the beginning of December, if one wanted to, foroperational purposes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not quite relevant, but I wouldremind people that once we tried to do that with all the targets. Wesaid: We aren't quite ready; we'll set them at the end of the year.And Mr. Proxmire sent us back, threatening us with a legal suit. ButI don't think that's relevant, really, in terms of just one of theaggregates. Do you have anything to say, Mr. Boehne?MR. BOEHNE. Well, I must confess that I find this to be oneof the lesser issues of our times, so I haven't been able to generatestrong feelings one way or the other. I think I would come down onthe side of keeping the 3 to 8 percent target--but, in effect,suspending it--on the grounds that it might be useful at some point.I would also keep it for 1987, but surround it with as many caveats asI could conceive of.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris, you are against anything[relating to] Ml. You would say drop it and bury it?MR. MORRIS. My position is very simple, Mr. Chairman. Idon't think we can measure money in the old transactions balance sensein the United States. I don't think that we are going to be able todo it next year or the year after that or the year after that. Ithink it is nostalgia that is reflected in all of these comments aboutM1 returning to its historical relationships; the probability of that,given the changed character of Ml, has got to be extremely low. Itseems to me that at some point we ought to say we can't measure moneyin the old sense because of all of the institutional changes that havetaken place and, therefore, we are going to use liquid assets insteadof money as a target. I would have M2 and M3 and, since we alwayshave three targets, I would add total liquid assets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whose growth is very low this year.MR. MORRIS. I know it; and it's not incompatible with what'sgoing on in the economy either. It has been decelerating since mid-1984; and if you look at the rate of growth in nominal GNP, that hasbeen decelerating too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So was debt a few years ago and that hasbeen rising like crazy.MR. MORRIS. I think I tried to unsell debt some time ago.7/8-9/86MR. BLACK. It's not necessarily the old relationships thatwould have to re-emerge but predictable relationships. I think thetrend of velocity is going to be lower in the future than it has beenin the past.MR. MORRIS. We will need a predictable relationship for anextended period of time. You don't take one six-month period ofexperience or a year's experience and get predictable relationships.MR. BLACK. I agree with that.MR. JOHNSON. We really need some time series on how much inNOW accounts are people's savings.MR. BLACK. We need a lot of future information so we wouldknow what to do next year too. That's really what it comes down to.I don't think we have to have the whole relationship resumed but wehave to have predictable relationships if we are going to use any kindof monetary target. But the alternative, which you posed very well awhile ago, Frank, is choosing a level of interest rates, unless we dosomething like Chairman Volcker once suggested when I made a similarassertion that we can stabilize the exchange rate. But basically in acountry like this, we have two choices: use some aggregate or pick theappropriate level of interest rates. And the question, I think, is onwhich path we'll make the smallest mistakes.MR. ANGELL. We're probably going to make big mistakes onboth of them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or commodity prices or something.MR. MORRIS. Well, I think the biggest mistake we could havemade would have been to follow Ml the last 4 or 5 years. I think wewould have set this country right on its ear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think there is some disagreementabout how much weight we want to retain on M1 for some indefinitefuture period that we don't quite know about. I don't know how toresolve that problem. I suspect it's unresolvable in the sense ofgetting agreement among the members. I have a little logicaldifficulty with a monitoring range regarding what it means or at leastwhether we really want to do it. If we establish a monitoring rangethat means anything, we've got to establish a new target.MR. JOHNSON. I think what most people mean is that wemonitor it but not really set a range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm really addressing it to the onlypersons, at least on this Committee, who said set a new range. Whenyou come up against Mr. Melzer and Mr. Parry, the problem is: How doyou know what you want to set?MR. PARRY. If you talk about language for 1986, variant Idoesn't use the term "monitoring" but accomplishes it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could change--MR. PARRY. I think it's nice without it.7/8-9/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could write down a new range and saythis is now a monitoring range. I don't know what we would say.MR. RICE. We could keep the present range and say it's amonitoring range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, except that the present range is amonitoring range. We are monitoring how far outside the range we arenow. It seems a little strange.MR. FORRESTAL. We used that term "monitoring" in 1982 or1983, I think it was.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we had a range.MR. FORRESTAL. Did we? That was my question. Did we set atarget at that time?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure, we did.MR. JOHNSON. We could keep the 3 to 8 percent, but[unintelligible] July.MR. MORRIS. I think Manley's idea is the right one. Weshould say we are going to monitor M1 and we are going to monitordebt, but we are not going to set ranges for either of them. We arenot going to set any monitoring ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All I am trying to think about is how weshould word it. In the wording we can say all sorts of things; buthow operational it is, I don't know.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That is not what monitoring rangeshave meant in the past.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With a monitoring aggregate in the past,we have had a range. There's no doubt about it.MR. MORRIS. What I am suggesting is that we say we think wemay be able to learn something from the M1 data and from the debt dataand we are going to continue to monitor that data but we are not goingto set a monitoring range.MR. PARRY. Doesn't the language of that first variant get usout of some of these problems? It doesn't use the word "monitor" butit says on the second page on page 21 [of the Bluebook]: "In light ofthe uncertainties and of the substantial decline in velocity in thefirst half of the year, the Committee decided that growth of M1 inexcess of the previously established 3 to 8 percent range for 1986could be acceptable, depending upon the behavior of" etc.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What page are you on?MR. PARRY. Page 21, the second line beginning with "In lightof." This is variant I.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we would say something like that.-20-7/8-9/86MR. PARRY. And that gets away from having to use the word"monitor."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the great majority of the Committeemembers--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But we would have a number, just--MR. PARRY. Oh yes, for 1986--the one we established inFebruary.MR. JOHNSON. I would change "could be" to "is."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't need [precise] language now.MR. BLACK. It seems to me that whatever numbers we put inthere ought to be predicated in part on what we think we are likely towant next year. If you think we are likely to want a lot of growth inmoney then 5 to 10 percent makes more sense; but if you think by nextyear a lower figure would make more sense, then the rebasing argumentcomes into play. Then it comes down to 3 to 8 percent or 3 to 7percent or whatever we might decide looks more logical from a publicrelations standpoint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, just summarizing the discussion, agreat majority of the Committee members want some variant but don'twant to horse around with it--just admit we are running over it forthis year. The majority of the non-Committee members want to do thesame thing. So, unless people have any great changes of heart I thinkwe are someplace in that neighborhood. We don't need to decide thisissue right now, but that is where we are unless there are greatchanges of heart tomorrow. Unless somebody gets persuasive with agold tongue, we're much more evenly divided regarding next year. It'spretty evenly divided; I'm not being too precise about it. I don'tthink these are the most crucial issues; I agree with Mr. Boehne onthat. I presume the choice is that we either say we don't know rightnow and we may or may not have a range by the time we get to the endof the year and have to decide, or we write a figure down--I wouldpresume something like this year's--and say we'll decide at the end ofthe year whether we really need it or not because we are not at allsure that we mean it. And there isn't an enormous amount ofdifference between those two choices.MR. BOEHNE. Which one do you feel more comfortable uttering?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I probably would feel slightlymore comfortable saying we'll get around to it at the end of the year,but I am not sure it makes a lot of difference. The only loss indoing that, and I don't think this is an enormous issue so long as weget the right language, is how easy it is to return to it if we wantto. Clearly, it's pretty simple to return to it at the end of theyear, if we really want to at that point. If we don't want to then,and we stated the range earlier, it isn't going to help much. I don'tthink the difference is all that enormous.MR. RICE. Do you think the difference is of any significancefor public understanding of what we are doing?7/8-9/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I presume if we didn't have atarget, we would say: We are not crazy about being over it now, but wethink we half understand and half don't understand it; and if M1continues to run high and these other [aggregates] are running high weanticipate that we would get worried about it. We would look at itand take it into account, but we don't have any particular number inmind. If it was running high in connection with the others that wouldbe of some significance to us. Next year we would like to see it alot lower, but we are not ready to commit ourselves at this point.MR. BOEHNE. I would urge my colleagues around the table torally behind the Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Given that you [don't] think it's anenormous point, I think that's about where we are at the moment. Wewill start tomorrow with the business outlook, which we haven't reallydealt with, and then return to the long-term ranges in an operationalsense. But I would hope not to linger too much over this M1 issue andbe able to dispose of that in something like five minutes tomorrow.With the background of this discussion, I think that's roughly wherethe weight lies. So, unless somebody wants to be very persuasivetomorrow and feels very strongly--MR. GUFFEY. May I ask for an explanation of the discussionthat you just had with yourself with respect to 1986 and 1987 withregard specifically to the use of the term "monitoring range"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that discussion I don't think I usedthe term "monitoring range" because we wouldn't have a range. Wewould say "monitor."MR. GUFFEY. That's all I wanted to know.SPEAKER(?). 9:30 a.m. tomorrow?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we make it 9:15 a.m. because wehave plenty of things to discuss before we go up to that lunch. Or,we can start at 9:00 a.m. if you want to. Let's start at 9:00 a.m. Ihad some crazy thought to say about this, but it has escaped me.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just to pick up on what you did say:The logic of what you are saying is that if we don't have a monitoringrange, at least in an historical context, M1 is less important thandebt because with debt we have always had a range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I would respond to that insome logical sense that may be correct. I don't think it really iscorrect. I think I am more certain even about the appropriate coursefor Ml right now than I am for debt. I do get worried about debtrising substantially faster than the GNP, I guess; I might not doanything about it but it doesn't seem to me right in the long run. Iam not sure that one can say that about M1 in the very long run. For1986 and 1987, I am not sure I can say it. I think something is thematter with debt rising as fast as it is. I am not sure thatsomething is the matter with Ml rising as fast as it is for thislimited period of time. Sure, if it grows that fast for five years,we would be in trouble. But if we are in some kind of transition to anew world, maybe M1 relative to GNP is still very low historically.-22-7/8-9/86Debt is very high historically. That is suggesting that we [shouldbe] more worried about the level of debt than about the level of Ml insome sustainable sense.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I am not sure I quite follow that"relative"--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's statistically true, I think.When you look at the levels, it's statistically correct.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But in the historical context thatwe use these things, wouldn't you say it's also true that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Growth in] M1 is very rapid relative tothat of GNP for this period in time. There's no doubt about that,historically. They are both equally out of line in terms of the year-to-year growth path.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So treat them equally and have arange for both.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are going to get your two minutes to[expound to] everybody in a much longer discussion tomorrow. You canbe really persuasive, but I guess you are going to have to convincepeople that they may not want to swear by your new range but monitorby it. Suppose you made the range the numbers the staff has here.What are they: 6 to 11 percent or something?MR. ANGELL. No, 3 to 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you are talking about next year; Iam talking about this year. Suppose you made it 6 to 11 percent?Does that make you feel more comfortable than some other figure interms of--?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it makes me feel morecomfortable only in the sense that we might run into the situationthat you yourself described, where the economic situation wasdifferent from the one we are looking at right now and Ml was growingat 15 percent and M3 and M2 were at 9 percent. If we didn't have anykind of a quantitative range for M1, I don't see how we could bring itto bear in a policy context. But at least if we had some kind of aquantitative range, it seems to me more credible that it wouldmanifest itself in those circumstances.MR. ANGELL. Are you arguing for 1987?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, for any period. I don't thinkit matters in a literal sense in the near term--certainly not the[next] 12 months or so. But I just have this nagging feeling--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll give you one to go home and thinkabout overnight. Suppose the economy was moving more rapidly than allof these projections, and everybody was feeling much more buoyant, andmaybe M2 and M3 were a little high but not outside the ranges, but M1was behaving quite nicely within your new 6 to 11 percent range. Sayit's only 10-1/2 percent.-23-7/8-9/86VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That would bother me.MR. ANGELL. That could be a real problem.MR. MORRIS. Or it could be like 1976, when Ml came in verylow.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We can't deal with every contingencywith one set of numbers. All I am saying is that I think there is adanger of getting into a position where we have no quantitative hookwhatsoever.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will see tomorrow, with a shortadditional argument, whether you can persuade your colleagues.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Sounds reasonable.[Meeting recessed]7/8-9/86July 9, 1986--Morning Session[Secretary's Note: Chairman Volcker called for a discussionof the economic outlook.]MR. KEEHN. Well, Mr. Chairman, our outlook for this year andnext year is consistent with the staff forecast; our numbers are closein a broad sense. In the Midwest conditions of expansion continue butcertainly at a slower pace than in some other parts of the country.The consumer side out our way is pretty vigorous. Retail sales havebeen improving and one chain we talked to had the [best] May they havehad in years. Auto sales seem to be pretty high, about equal to lastyear's level. But the manufacturing sector, as always, is prettymixed. There are parts of it that have been doing well and continueto do well; building products are an example of that. All of thepeople in the building products side are operating pretty much at thetop of their capacity. Those parts that have been weak show noparticular sign of improvement. A somewhat recent development is thattwo large crane manufacturers in the Midwest in effect have gone outof that business; they just decided to get out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What kind of manufacturers?MR. KEEHN. Heavy crane manufacturers. Farm equipment andrailroad equipment are operating at about 25 percent of their levelsof the late 1970s. Every once in a while, maybe for myself, I take alook at the railroad numbers. In May of this year, for example, therewere all of 950 cars ordered. For the five months through May 1986,ordering has been at about the 6,000 level. That's up from 1985, butfor the full year in railway equipment there is the anticipation thatthere will be about 10,000 cars ordered. That compares with the peaklevel in 1979 of about 90,000. That certainly is one example of atroubled industry.There are two specific areas that I thought I would commenton. One is construction activity, which in the District and inChicago particularly, has been and continues to be extraordinarilystrong. On the residential side, housing starts in the District forthe [first] five months of the year are up 24 percent as compared withthose five months a year ago. In Illinois they are up 57 percent andI think that's the largest increase of any state in the country. InChicago the number is even much larger than 57 percent. So, we have avery significant housing boom going on.In the nonresidential sector, floor contracts are continuingat what seem like increasing levels. For the five months of this yearfloor area contracts on nonresidential [structures] are up about 5percent; that's a contrast from the national figures, which indicate aslump. And in Chicago the office boom continues despite the strongactivity that we have had over the last two or three years. Manybuildings are being announced; in one way or another some 14 millionsquare feet have been committed to over and above what is alreadygoing on. My conclusion on this is that in the construction side wehave some trends going on that certainly seem pretty unsustainable.On the inflation side, the news continues to be pretty good.Pricing is terribly tight. Everybody I talk to says that both rawmaterial and product prices are extremely tight, with very little7/8-9/86give, and increases certainly just aren't sticking. That's true evenfor the industries that are going through pretty high levels ofactivity. Paperboard is an example. That's an industry that is doingwell. This April they had the biggest April that they had ever had inthat industry and yet even now the pricing is only very modestlyrecovered from the amount that they lost during the recession. Icommented before on labor contracts that have been settled. I thinkthe news there continues to be pretty good. By and large thecontracts are coming out on a three-year basis at about 3 percent or atouch under--a higher settlement in the first year but declining inthe second and third years. But importantly--and this goes back to achart that Mike Prell was showing yesterday--I am hearing that thereare very, very substantial work rule changes in these contracts.Although managements are going after the financial side, they arereally going all out after the work rule side. As a consequence ofthose substantial work rule changes, in terms of unit labor costs, Ithink the outlook is pretty good. Two steel companies have settledtheir contract negotiations; hourly wages were reduced and in bothcases the COLAs were eliminated. Inland Steel's contract was up for avote. The ballots were counted yesterday and I don't know how it cameout, but that would suggest a similar pattern. Caterpillar settledover the weekend. They have not announced the terms of the deal, butthey did reach a negotiation and the expectation is, or it's entirelypossible, that it will call for a wage freeze but that they did notget rid of the COLA. They wanted to get rid of the COLA but they didnot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who is that?MR. KEEHN. Caterpillar. I know you saw theand I think he was suggesting to you a higher numberthan, in fact, worked out. It sounds like they got a freeze butdidn't get rid of the COLA. They went into [the negotiations]thinking they'd have a higher number. Deere is next on the list andthey will have a very tough negotiation; they would like to get rid ofthe COLA and they would like to get a freeze as well. I might mentionthat there is a little mini-exception to this 3-year, 3 percentpattern that I mentioned. It relates to us. The Chicago BuildingTrades have been [unintelligible]--those that had an impact on ourbuilding projects. There was a settlement there over the weekend fora 2-year contract and a 5 percent annual increase. But I think that'sa very narrow, very specialized kind of situation. Net, the laborcost situation seems to be pretty good and the outlook for the nextyear or so okay.I have a final comment on this tax legislation. As I talk topeople, I have a growing feeling of gloominess on the business side inthat the shift of the burden from the consumer to the business sideseems to be having a heavier toll, at least on outlooks. And I thinkthe introduction of the changes on a staggered basis is causingapprehension. I hear what Jim says as to the impact but, at least asI hear the comments, it sounds like it might have a greater effect on1987 than perhaps they have provided for [in the forecast]. As welook at it now, we expect the expansion to continue, though certainlyat a more modest pace than was our expectation earlier in the year.But at this point, as we view it, we are very, very dependent upon theconsumer; and I think as a consequence it will be important that we doanything we can do to deal with the consumer side of this.-26-7/8-9/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. Our forecast is very similar to that of theBoard's staff. We do have a slightly more rapid pickup in the secondhalf of this year, but I must admit that more recent information thatwe have about inventories raises the likelihood that the pickup willget a later start. Also, our forecast for business fixed investmentis slightly greater than that of the Board's staff. For 1987, ourforecast for growth is virtually the same. We differ in our inflationforecast; but I think our forecast of a percentage point higher numberfor inflation is not all that significantly different, given theuncertainties associated with the forecast at this time.In the Twelfth District, the general economic picture remainsquite mixed. We have quite a few industries that are doing well, suchas commercial aircraft, electronics, and retail trade. But we alsohave our share of weak industries. Agriculture is weak and a littleweakness has shown up again in the forest products area. The thingthat I would like to note is that in recent discussions with ourdirectors and also with our business and agricultural advisory counciland others in the business community, there has been a noticeableerosion of confidence in the last month or two. Before we werehearing optimistic signs from all of these people; now they seem tothink that things have become noticeably worse. Basically, I thinktheir comments are reflecting the weakness that actually did occur inthe second quarter. And frankly, they expect it to continue in thesecond half. I sometimes think that their forecasts are basedprimarily on what they see over their shoulder or what they areexperiencing at the present time. But I think it is significant thattheir sentiment has changed in the last month or so. On Thursday, wewill have a meeting of our board of directors. It's interesting tonote that at the last two board meetings there has been a very closevote against lowering the discount rate; I really think it's quitelikely that that's going to change at this Thursday's meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. When you have a spate of bad news such as we havehad the last month or two, it's very tempting to focus on that partalone; I think all of us tend to do that. The good news is that thesame thing happens on the other side and I think it's good for us tostep back a little and try to take a little longer perspective than wesometimes do. If I remember correctly, back in April we were allpretty bullish because we had several fundamental factors that wethought were going to oil the wheel for the last half of the year: wehad the declines in prices; the depreciation in the dollar; and thenthe continued low inflation. All this seemed to suggest to us thatthings were going to accelerate. And that was a very short while ago.Now, of course, we have reached the point where the depressing effectof the oil price decline on the producers is apt to be replaced by orsurpassed by the positive effect on the oil users. So putting allthese things together, it still seems reasonable to me that we oughtto have a pretty fair increase in the second half of this year. Wehave revised our figures downward as a result of the bad news that hascome in, but we are still just a tad above where the Board staff isand about where the consensus is of the Reserve Bank presidents'forecasts. If we get some more information that is below par and inparticular if we don't see some improvement in the trade situation,7/8-9/86then I think we are going to have to take another look at it. But forthe time being we think that we might have [growth of] 3-1/2 percentin the third quarter and maybe 4-1/4 percent or something like that inthe fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, in the Sixth District growthhas been about the same as in the nation as a whole over the firsthalf of the year. But over the last month or so we have seen someweakening of the District economy on average. To be sure, we stillhave some pretty positive sectors in the economy. Consumer spendinghas held up pretty well: merchandise sales have been good,particularly in the furniture area, which had been hard hit by importsbut recently seems to have been helped by the pickup in housing in theSoutheast; and auto sales, while off a bit, still continue at a prettyhigh level. Single family housing has been good and, like other partsof the country, we have benefitted from the slackening of European andother overseas travel and tourism has picked up considerably. Thathas been a positive element in most areas of the District.I have been reporting pretty favorable news in the Southeastover the past year or so, but this time I think I would have to pointto some very serious problems that have developed. First andforemost, of course, is the energy sector with a contraction that Ibelieve has been more severe than we had expected earlier. And theweakness has spread beyond the energy sector itself and is reachinginto state governments. For example, in Louisiana I heard a reportthat the state government is cutting back severely in the universitysystem; programs are being cut and I think that will continue in otherparts of the state as well. The lumber industry also has been badlyhit. Commercial construction is a concern. Vacancy rates in mostcities are not quite as high as the national average, but they areincreasing; we are at a level of almost 20 percent on average. And arecent development that could become a very serious situation if itcontinues is the very severe shortage of rainfall that we haveexperienced. We have seen in most of the Southeast the most severedrought in over 100 years. That is having an impact, of course, notonly on agriculture, which is already weak, but on other areas aswell; and that impact is going to become even more severe if we don'tget some relief. Water rationing, for example, is in effect in manyplaces and now is beginning to have some effect on businessproduction. Going back to the energy sector for just a moment, Iwanted to mention that the rig count of Louisiana is now the lowestsince 1949.Looking beyond the Sixth District to the nation as a whole,we too have changed our forecast for the latter part of 1986. Wedon't think that activity is going to be quite as strong as we hadforecast earlier. We are about on the same mark as the Board staff interms of growth for the latter part of 1986. For 1987, I think we areshowing slightly higher growth. Our difference with the Board staff'sforecast in 1987 I think relates basically to inflation. We seeinflation somewhat higher than the Board staff; the difference there,as I have analyzed it, is that we perhaps are attributing a littlemore impact to the dollar effect than the Board staff is.-28-7/8-9/86I have just two final comments that echo what Si Keehn wassaying. People that I am talking to around the District are veryapprehensive about the effects of the tax bill. I think theuncertainty surrounding it is certainly causing them to pause withrespect to business investment. But having said all that, when I talkto people generally, the confidence level as of maybe a week and halfago was still pretty high. People in individual businesses say "Mybusiness has never been better." In trying to analyze this, I havejust a very quick impression [along the lines] of what we were justtalking about this morning. People who are reporting very goodresults for the first half of 1986 are basically the smaller andmiddle-sized businesses. I don't hear that from the larger concerns.I just throw that out for what it may be worth. I don't know whetherthat has general applicability or not.In summary, Mr. Chairman, my feeling is that if we don't seesome faster activity emerging pretty soon, I think the more positive--the more acceptable--outlook for 1987 really may not develop.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. The Third District continues to do better thanthe nation as a whole. Construction activity, particularly thehousing market, has been quite good. Pennsylvania ranks second onlyto California in the total number of existing homes sold during thefirst quarter, and the average cost of a house in the Northeast ishigher than the cost of a house in the West for the first time inrecent history. Nonresidential construction has begun to soften some,but not to the extent that it has in the nation as a whole. Retailsales have been especially good in the Philadelphia area; I think ithas something to do with the relative strengthening of expectationsabout the economic future of the area, which for a number of years wasnot good. I think it is beginning to catch up to people as theoutlook is better. Manufacturing continues to be something of a drag,but not as much of a drag as in the rest of the country. If you lookat things like help wanted advertising, that has reached a high pointand continues to be expanding. It's awfully hard, particularly in thesuburbs, to go into stores without seeing signs in the windows askingfor people to apply. I find the same kind of dichotomy, however, asBob Forrestal does. There does seem to be more optimism among peoplein smaller and medium-sized businesses than those in the older,traditional large firms. I guess that has to do with just the natureof the economy. I have not sensed a general deterioration insentiment, as Si has. I think sentiment is still reasonablyoptimistic for later in the year, although it may be more fragile thanit was a few months ago.Turning to the nation, there is something of a dichotomy inwhat I have just said about my own region and my views about what isgoing on in the nation. I am more bearish now about the outlook thanI was a few months ago. The reasons have to do with both the timingas well as perhaps some changes in the fundamentals--or at least ourperception of the fundamentals. In recent discussions around thetable, I think most of us have tended to emphasize the positive thingsabout the economy: the drop in the dollar and oil prices, etc., etc.Yet there are a number of drags: in petroleum, in farming, in exportdemand, and tax reform itself. While most people think it's probablygood over the long pull, there is definitely a drag in the short pull.7/8-9/86My sense is that we have tended to over-emphasize the effects of thestimulative factors and have not taken into account, at least toenough of an extent, those factors that are dragging on the economy.Part of it is timing, but I think some of it may be more fundamentalthan that. So where I come out is that, yes, I still think there isgoing to be a pickup. But I am less sure of that than I was; I havemore doubts about it. I find it quite difficult to see the threat oftoo much economic growth in the months ahead, but I could much moreeasily visualize too little. On the inflation front, I thinkinflation is an ongoing threat and we have to be careful about it andsensitive to it. But it does strike me as less of a threat now thanthe threat of too anemic an economy as we go to the end of 1986 andinto 1987.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. My forecast is similar to the staff's forecast,but I have found myself in the last three or four months relativelyconcerned about the downside risks of the forecast. I focus theseconcerns on two particular areas. First of all, like many others, myforecast depends on a significant improvement in exports and I wonderwhether that is really going to come to pass. The other area that Ifocus my concerns on is the long list of imbalances in the economy.I'm not quite sure how that works through the forecast as would thefailure of net exports to improve; but the list is long and this seemsto me to be a very difficult economic environment for a recovery tocontinue.Turning to the District, our recent numbers show nosignificant strengthening but no significant deterioration in economicactivity. From businessmen in our District--our directors among them--I sense a growing caution but not yet disappointment in the economy.Perhaps they are not disappointed on the trade side because they werealways skeptical about the trade rebound; they didn't expect it and ithasn't happened. They continue to report intense import competitionand we, like Si Keehn, also have industries that simply have beenunable to lift their prices. Again, as in Si's District, ourbusinessmen and directors seem fairly happy with the laborarrangements they have. I know it's fashionable to talk about changesin work rules when you have labor settlements, but I hear that talkoften enough and from enough people that I think they are notposturing--that maybe this is really happening. I hear a lot of goodfeelings about the whole labor arrangement that businessmen arefacing. A lot of the them seem to attribute the present sluggishnessto the up-front problems with the oil industry. We have a reasonableamount of that in Ohio; Marathon just announced layoffs yesterday, asa matter of fact. In conclusion, I think the economic outlook isgood, but the risks are increasingly on the down side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, the New England economy isstill growing extremely well as exemplified by the fact that McDonaldsis offering $4.95 an hour and is still having trouble finding peopleto flip hamburgers. But my reading is that the national numbers arevery disturbing. I have been very optimistic that we were going tosee an acceleration in real activity in the last half of the year,certainly on the basis of what the broader monetary aggregates have-30-7/8-9/86done in the first half. That suggests that we ought to be seeingabout a 7 percent nominal GNP growth, and I thought that was justabout right. But the staff is now forecasting 5 percent instead of 7percent. And I am inclined to agree with Mr. Boehne and Mrs. Hornthat if there's something wrong with our forecast, it could be thatthe forecast is too optimistic. I see a sense of contrast between[the economy and] the financial numbers. If I were sitting on adesert island and had only the financial numbers, I would say there isa tremendous boom going on in the United States. But if you look atthe numbers for real activity, the last month gives no encouragementthat we are going to get a faster rate of growth in the third quarter.The new orders figures certainly don't suggest it. The decelerationin the rate of payroll employment gains doesn't suggest it. I reallydon't understand what is going on out there. The system is notresponding according to the rule books that I would follow. So, Ifind this very disturbing. For months I have been thinking thatmonetary policy has been doing everything it could to produce ahealthy economy. I am less confident of that today because of theseeming failure of the real economy to respond to what the financialeconomy has been doing.MR. BLACK. It looks like the string we're pushing on is awet string!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, as I have been reporting,things have not been going all that well in our District. TheEleventh District economy seems to be about the weakest in thecountry. Not only has our situation gotten a little worse, we expectit to deteriorate even further and possibly at a bit faster pace. TheTexas unemployment rate in June rose to 10-1/2 percent, and that's thehighest level in modern times, certainly, for Texas. New Mexico andLouisiana expect to show increases in unemployment when their databecome available. The last report for Louisiana was 13 percent andthat's probably on the way up. As conditions worsen in energy,construction, and manufacturing, that is having some fairly severeeffects on our financial institutions. If you read the papers, it'spretty hard not to see one of our Texas organizations being featuredin one of the articles. Their performance has really not been allthat good! Looking at it from a supervisory standpoint, we don't[rate] our major bank holding companies very high from a supervisorylevel! Those that seem to be doing a little better we wonder about,because some of their major subsidiaries haven't been examined for ayear or year and a half and that makes us a little concerned over whatthe true situation might be.Now, I tried very hard to find some positive elements ofstrength in our District to report this time, but I just was notsuccessful. Aside from this regional report, though, I continue tofeel with regard to the broader picture that there will be some modestpickup in the second half of this year. Our forecast is in the middleof the forecasts of the Reserve Bank presidents. And we think this issustainable into 1987, if there's some monetary stimulus that comesabout to offset the economic drag of the uncertainties that areinherent in the fiscal environment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.7/8-9/86MR. MELZER. In the Eighth District, I'd say things are goingalong pretty well. We've heard a couple of comments about a change inpsychology; I haven't detected too much of that. Psychology amongbusinessmen is pretty much the same as it has been according to whatI've picked up. On an annual basis, we've had a good year in terms ofnonag employment gains; they have exceeded the national gains by abouta percentage point. Manufacturing employment has been pretty muchflat, although in the most recent three-month period we had modestgains there. Retail sales were lagging somewhat early in the secondquarter, although the sentiment was that the second quarter and thethird quarter would come in quite strong. Residential constructionhas been mixed. Single-family construction has been and continues tobe very strong, particularly in St. Louis; commercial constructionactivity in St. Louis, which I think in general has lagged behind someother cities in the country, continues to be strong and in theDistrict overall it is down less than nationally.In terms of the broader picture, our forecast would be forthe same rate of real growth as the Board's staff has both for thebalance of this year and next year and somewhat higher on theinflation side. In terms of real growth, while that's lower than Imight have expected a month or two ago, I'm not particularly troubledabout looking at 3 to 3-1/2 percent real growth as a projection, giventhe overall growth rate that seems to be prevailing in the world andproductivity gains and so forth. So, while it's lower, it's notsomething that at this point troubles me to the extent that I'd beinclined to react to it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. Dealing first with our District, the cross-currents that have characterized the economy in the District are ageneralization between the rural economy and the urban economy. Thosecross-currents persist, with the urban economies in general doingreasonably well and the rural economies continuing to struggle.Beyond that, looking at some of the state-by-state data, one of thethings that has emerged recently is that the numbers in the two statesin our District that have some involvement in the energy area, Montanaand North Dakota, clearly look worse than the rest of the District.In the rest of the District, while growth isn't as gloomy, in generalI would say it's certainly respectable and reasonably broad-based.But because of the energy involvement it looks like there is somecontraction, certainly in Montana, and maybe some flatness in NorthDakota. Beyond that, one of the more interesting things that hashappened recently, and was a surprise to me, was that three or fournew nonresidential construction projects have been announced for theTwin Cities. Whether that is good in the long run, of course, is anopen question because I think we are close to--if not already at--anoverbuilt situation. But in the short term that probably does augurwell for employment and so forth in the metropolitan area.As far as the national outlook is concerned, I share theoptimism evidenced in the Board staff's forecast, and indeed, I mightbe inclined to go a bit beyond that. It seems to me, as Mike Prellsuggested yesterday, that there are several factors that we canidentify right now that clearly have been retarding the economy--things like what is going on in agriculture, the adjustment in theenergy sector, nonresidential construction activity in general, and7/8-9/86the lack of improvement in the trade situation to date. It seems tome that we can at the same time identify a couple of those negativefactors that have been retarding the economy as having a fairly highprobability of turning around at some point. In particular, I'mthinking about a prospective improvement in trade and certainly atsome point a slowing, if not a stop, in the deterioration stemmingfrom the energy side. It's impossible, I think, to say with anyprecision when that may occur. But I think we can look forward tosome diminution in those factors that have been inhibiting economicgrowth. And when that is coupled with what I think are still somevery strong fundamentals--the kinds of things that we have talkedabout in the past like lower interest rates, a lower value of thedollar internationally, lower energy prices, and so forth--to my mindthe case for some acceleration in the pace of economic activity isstill a compelling one. But I would repeat the caveat that I thinkit's impossible to say with any precision exactly when this maymaterialize. I didn't find the second-quarter performanceparticularly discouraging in this regard, because it seems to me thatwe have been well aware and have been saying for some time around herethat the adjustment has been occurring in energy. We've been wellaware of the so-called J-curve effects on the trade side and weren'tconfident--or at least I personally didn't expect--that somehow in thesecond quarter things were going to start to improve materially. ButI think the basic case, and certainly my own expectation, for someimprovement in real growth is still there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just a couple of quick words aboutthe District situation, which I think is a lot like others havedescribed in that small and medium-sized firms, even in manufacturing,are doing quite well to very well. Nonresidential construction andthe housing markets are very, very strong, especially in the New Yorkmetropolitan area. The service sector--and of course there's aspecial premium on financial services--is in a state of near frenzy.But there's a great question in my mind as to how sustainable that is.The large firms, especially large manufacturing firms--both those that[operate] there and those that are headquartered there--are by andlarge pretty dismal in terms of their outlook. Even in the case ofIBM, which earlier in the year seemed to think that things were aboutto take a turn for the better, certainly doesn't have any convictionbehind that outlook at this juncture.In terms of the national economy, my own forecast is verysimilar, and almost identical, to the staff forecast in both theaggregate sense and in most of the details. But I must say, I haveperhaps as little conviction about a forecast at this point as I'veever had. I could easily put together a forecast that's stronger andI could easily put together one that's weaker. Some of the factorsthat have been mentioned--energy, commercial construction, andagriculture--are the obvious things that would point in the latterdirection. But abstracting from those particular areas of concern, Ihave two overriding concerns: the first is this financial sectordichotomy that Frank Morris referred to. I too find it very hard torationalize the patterns of behavior that we see in financial markets--not just in the United States but around the world--with what seemsto be going on in the real economy. And I have a nagging feeling thatwe may be a little more accident prone there than we would like to7/8-9/86admit. I say that not with a view on nonperforming loans at banks, asmuch of a problem as that can be in its own right, but more that whenI look at the sheer volume and volatility that we see in the financialmarkets these days, I can't help but think that when we have a 62 or63 point change in the Dow-Jones average in one day, that in itselffeeds on this sense of uneasiness that a number of people have beenreferring to around the table. It makes you scratch your head alittle and say: What the heck is going on here?The other area of great concern that I have that transcendsthese particular sectoral concerns is the continuing economic,financial, and indeed political, implications of the trade and currentaccount situation. I read all the books about J-curves and all therest of the [hype] but I must say I still have, and perhapsincreasingly, a great deal of difficulty seeing how we will workourselves out of that situation in an orderly way short of arecession-induced correction, which would obviously be very, verymessy.As a number of people have suggested, I too sense that maybeconfidence levels have ebbed a bit. I think the reason for that maywell be associated to some extent with these financial market goingson. But I also think that there's a little phenomenon taking placenow where for a variety of reasons--including, for example, the courtruling on Gramm-Rudman--the imbalances that have been there all alongare maybe showing through in a more transparent way than has been thecase. Again, I think we've got to keep some perspective on thoseimbalances. The staff forecast, for example, is going to produce anunemployment rate in 1986 of 7.1 percent. Now, the last time we hadan unemployment rate of 7.1 percent was in 1980. When you look atwhat has happened since 1980, there have been some very good things:the inflation rate has come down from 10 to 2-1/2 percent and we arenow in one of the longest economic recoveries on record, despite thisenormous trade deficit. But when you look beneath that, in 1980 wehad a trade surplus in real terms in excess of $50 billion. We nowhave a trade deficit in real terms of $140 billion. In 1980, thebudget deficit was $50 billion or $60 billion; it's now $200 billionplus. In 1980, the personal saving rate was 7 percent; now it's 4percent. And those fundamentals are not going to change very easily.To some extent, I think what we're seeing right now is a renewedappreciation that those fundamentals are there. And the final irony,of course, is that if indeed the economy were slipping badly, one ofthe things one thinks about doing is trying to provide some fiscalstimulus. But as a practical matter, we're not exactly in the idealposition to be able to do that. It all comes back to saying that thewhole ball game seems unfortunately to rest on monetary policy. It'sa very difficult outlook; and I guess I would be in the camp withthose who are more worried rather than less worried.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What has happened andwhat is happening in the Tenth District is not greatly different thanwhat I have described in past meetings, and that is, that it's a veryunbalanced situation. In the urban areas, things are going quitenicely except in Oklahoma, which is particularly impacted by theenergy and agricultural situation. And in the rural areas there'sgrowing desperation as to how this whole thing will play itself out.7/8-9/86Having said that, I guess I'd like to focus on a couple of good piecesof information. One would be that the wheat crop is out and was agood crop. The weather in the growing season has been very good forall the crops, generally speaking, in the Tenth District. And I guessI take some comfort that they are having a drought in the Southeast,which will improve the commodity prices spilling into the TenthDistrict or [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't seem to be improving much.MR. GUFFEY. Not very much; I'm afraid that's right. Anotherpiece of information that comes out of a quarterly survey that weconduct has to do with agricultural real estate prices. There was afurther drop from the fourth quarter to the first quarter of about 5percent in agricultural real estate values. That's down roughly 21percent from a year ago and roughly 50 percent of the values posted in1981, which was the high point. But the good news that may be showingthrough is that ranch land, for example, was down 7 percent, but cropland was only down 3 percent; and that is a slowing in the decline incrop land values. So, to the extent that you're searching for anygood news, I suppose you could dwell on that only briefly to say thatmaybe we're getting close to the bottom of the decline in agriculturalreal estate values.With respect to the energy sector, it continues to worsen.For example, in the District there are 193 rigs now working and that'sroughly 1/3 of the number of rigs that were working at the end ofJanuary of 1986, just a few months ago. In the banking sector,particularly that part that services agriculture and energy, [the newsis bad]. At the agriculture-related banks the loan-to-deposit ratiois only at 53 percent, which is the lowest level since we began doingthe survey in 1976--which merely says that the banks can't find anycredit-worthy borrowers. This demonstrates some of the pain and thedistress that is showing up and clearly is present in the agriculturaland energy areas.With respect to manufacturing in the District, the farmmachinery and oil equipment manufacturing is weak. On the other hand,auto assemblies, which are a very big component of our economy, arestill going full out. In general aviation, aircraft for example is avery depressed part of the economy. Tourism is very strong,apparently in large part because of people travelling in the UnitedStates rather than going abroad.Turning attention to the nation, our projections are verysimilar to the staff projections. But increasingly, I am concernedabout the pickup we have been expecting in the third and fourthquarters as well as in 1987 because it seems largely dependent uponthe net export position. The swing that the staff has built in isfairly dramatic between now and the first quarter of 1987. If thatdoes not come to pass, it seems to me that the economy is going tocontinue to buck along at a 2 percent [rate] in the period ahead; andit seems to me that perhaps that's not satisfactory for the long pull.To the extent that monetary policy [through] interest rate levels canimpact that, I guess I would be more inclined today to do somethingalong that line than I have been in the past, even though it will helponly at the margin and not be of great benefit in my view to my-35-7/8-9/86section of the country. But at the national level, I'm coming closerto feeling the need to do something more in the monetary policy area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the most significant factorwe face is that the world economy is not really going much ofanywhere; it's stagnant. And I think it's behaving about like wewould expect the world economy to behave in a period in whichinternational credit had been on one path--on a 20-25-30 percentgrowth path--and then entered a period of much slower growth.Adjustments get to be very difficult. And world trade is no longer[moving in] an expansionary fashion. I think maybe we are beginningto find out why it was that protectionism got to be such a significantmovement in the 1920s and early 1930s. In this environment it's onlynatural that everyone will worry more about their market share thanthey will about a growing market. And in this environment I thinkit's very difficult for us to expect to make as much gain on ourbalance of trade as we would like to make. I think it's going to bevery difficult for those who enjoyed huge balance of trade surplusesnot to have pretty slow growth economies unless they do somethingabout the deflationary impact on their economies.Apparently, I see inflation somewhat differently than othersdo. I have come to see it less as a set of numbers that behave insuch and such a pattern than to see inflation laws and attitudes. Isee an attitude that says that prices rise and prices don't fall. Andduring such a period, individuals are anxious to restructure theirportfolios away from monetary assets to real assets. Duringinflationary periods, you see, people are rewarded who are good atmaking portfolio shifts like that. In such a period you find--whetheryou're in the farming business or in the oil business or whateverbusiness you're in--that you make more money depending upon how fastyou borrow money and how fast you buy equipment and how fast you spendmoney.But a deflationary environment is really quite different. Adeflationary environment is one in which people begin to see thatprices can fall as well as rise. It seems to me that John MaynardKeynes in his Treatise on Money gave some really good indicationsabout what one might expect to happen during such periods. And itseems to me that what is happening in the world's economy reflects theactuality of inflation being less than anticipated. I might suggestthat if we're to do our job in economic analysis--of course, we cannotalways forecast without any errors. But whenever we as a professionbegin to forecast the rate of inflation over a 5- 6- or 7-year periodand all the errors are in one direction, then I think one could makesome case for the fact that inflation expectations are misplaced. Andthose with time lags in production find out they can't sell theirproduct at the price they thought they could, so people's behaviorchanges. It seems to me that we're finding that kind of behaviorchange under way. And in this behavior pattern more firms are goingto devote attention to cutting costs than they are to trying to buy alot more equipment. The adjustment process is really rathersignificant. So, even though I used to be more pessimistic thanothers in some ways, I turn out to be somewhat more optimistic in asense. We have undergone such a significant deflation in many areas7/8-9/86of our economy and we're still kind of hanging on and I think that's areal plus.I believe we have to recognize [changed conditions] inagriculture, and Jerry may have been somewhat of a stimulus there.But when direct government payments to farmers and price supportactivity and direct payments for compensation for [unintelligible]differences are moved from a $12 billion annual rate up to a planned$24 billion annual rate and it is missed so badly, as I believe thislast agricultural bill has missed it, that the actual expenditures[unintelligible]--they are going to run more like $32 billion than $24billion--that puts a lot of support money out there. And eventuallythat's going to hold up.If we can continue to try to have some patience and becautious and make careful moves so interest rates adjust to changedconditions in the world, it seems to me that we have a chance tocontinue along on what some may think is a rather slow growth path.The only disadvantage of that slow growth path may be that it makes itvery difficult to get the government budget back in shape. As youknow, when things happen in agriculture as they have happened, thenthose Gramm-Rudman targets get out of kilter. So that adjustmentprocess may be very, very slow. But it seems to me that we have agood chance to keep expansion going for some time in the future. I'mnot going to be too pessimistic on the basis of the numbers coming outright now; I'm going to be optimistic as long as we respond withinterest rates to market perceptions in regard to these world economicconditions. I would certainly have a different forecast if I thoughtwe were going to peg short-term interest rates and prevent them fromresponding to market conditions. So, I'm in a position of saying thatmy forecast is exactly the way it was in February. I'm not sure thatis all that good but it may not be all that bad, if we can avoid anymajor deflationary or financial market disruptions that[brinkmanship], I suppose, runs a risk of encountering.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to interrupt this becausewe've got to move along. But I don't understand this chart that wehad yesterday on government payments to farmers. It only shows thatthey are about $12 billion and I thought they were more like whatGovernor Angell was reciting.MR. PRELL. Those numbers include the direct payments, thatis, largely the deficiency payments. There is a certain amount thatthe government is committed to making up if the farmers' prices arebelow a certain level. There is also the dairy cow reduction program.[Our number] doesn't include CCC and some of the other programs thatGovernor Angell was mentioning.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They certainly include something[unintelligible]. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff's forecast isabout the best way of looking at things right now. I continue to lookfor the pickup in the second half, though it likely will be less of anacceleration than I expected a month ago and probably will be later inthe second half than I expected. But like others, I find thesituation looks more clouded than usual, in part because of some ofthe factors pointed out by Frank Morris and Jerry Corrigan. It is7/8-9/86very difficult to read what is going on right now. At the presenttime, I have less confidence in my view of the future than I have hadin some time. It could be that I am being, as are others, undulyinfluenced by the most recent data that we have seen over the lastmonth. I hope that is so. But if we stand back and look at what isgoing on, I think we have to recognize, as Gary Stern pointed out,that some of the factors that have been dragging down the economy arelikely to become less influential in the future. The fundamentalsthat we counted on to spur the economy are still there. In my mind,it is hard to imagine that business fixed investment will come inlower than the staff forecast. It seems to me that [the forecast] inthat sector is probably a rock bottom outlook. And while a turnaroundin net exports may be delayed somewhat further, it is hard to imaginethat it will be delayed beyond the second half. I expect that we willsee this acceleration before the end of the year, and my own guess isthat the risks are not on the down side--that we are not likely to geta poorer performance than the staff's forecast. If anything, it willbe somewhat better than the staff's forecast. Now, all of this isclouded further by the overhang of tax reform. Tax reform, of course,is factored into the staff's forecast. But in my mind, there arecertain psychological effects that can't be factored in, which couldperhaps have a more restraining impact than one would imagine at thepresent time. This would be especially true if the revenue raisingprovisions kick in ahead of the cut in rates. So, while I wouldrepeat that the risk is probably on the up side of the staff'sforecast, there are these imponderables out there that are verydifficult to factor in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Well, I think business is sluggish and I think ithas been sluggish for most of this year. Economists, both within andoutside government, that I have spoken with in the last week or soseem to be busily revising their forecasts--mostly downward--probablyin reaction to the recent rather weak indicators. Back in February, Ithink Wayne Angell and I had the two lowest forecasts for real GNPgrowth for this year; mine was 2-1/2 percent. And after hearing allthe bullish comments at the table, I was feeling guilty about it so Itook advantage of Jim Kichline's offer to accept revisions and I putit up to 3 percent. Now I have moved it back down to 2-1/2 percent;I'm going round trip on this. Unfortunately, I just don't see what isgoing to cause business to pep up. I would like to see it happen; Iwould like to see stronger growth in the second half of this year. Iwould like to see a very healthy, dynamic economy next year too, but Ijust have doubts about our ability to pull it off. I know we arerelying very heavily on a trade turnaround, but the people in tradethat I speak with have convinced me that it is going to be verydifficult to do. We have already seen that the lags are longer; theyare going to be still longer. I agree with the comments of PresidentKeehn and Governor Rice and some of the others about the impact of taxreform. Just the uncertainties that have arisen from the proposalshave tended to curb businesses' enthusiasm for expansion andmodernization. And if what is in the Senate bill actually becomeslaw, the disincentives to investments are very, very great. That isthe way I read it, and this---38-7/8-9/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way I read it, [unintelligible] itcould only be worse than what's in the Senate bill by the time it getsfinished in conference.MS. SEGER. Yes, but what I am saying is that even what is inthe Senate bill will provide major disincentives to investment, eventhough we desperately need to modernize our manufacturing sector,particularly. Anyhow, I also sense that there is some deteriorationof confidence. The latest survey done by the National Federation ofIndependent Business, done in late June, showed a significant slippingin the optimism among their members, particularly in their expectedgains in real sales for the rest of the year. Also, they have reviseddownward their inventory and capital spending plans. I sense too thatsome of the inventory numbers and some of the new orders numbers weredistorted by these labor negotiations; individuals were building upadditional inventory to hedge against strikes in copper, aluminum andsteel and now it looks as if those strikes will not take place. Theywill have to work these inventories off. In the auto industry, Ithink some of the strength in sales is more apparent than real becausethey are having to make such tremendous efforts to get these sales--very great interest rate incentives are required, or cash rebates tocustomers, or additional rebates to the dealers themselves--and it isjust very very difficult to get these [sales]. Their inventories arealso hefty, particularly at General Motors. I can't imagine that thiswon't eventually lead to some pruning of production schedules. Iwould like to be a raging bull but I guess I can't quite do it today.Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I think everybody has just about covered allthe points, so I will try not to be too long-winded. There are acouple of things I want to stress. First, I was generally veryoptimistic too--in fact, I put in probably one of the strongerforecasts for 1986--when we first gave these forecasts back inFebruary. Of course, for 1986 my forecast is now down in the 2percent range from about a 4 to 4-1/2 percent range. What hashappened between the two periods for me is a growing pessimism aboutthe situation abroad in terms of the domestic growth possibilities inthe other industrial countries. There were strong expectations there;and I think our forecasts and the staff forecast were totallyreasonable--exactly what you would expect if we had gotten reasonableperformance abroad. But things have been coming in substantiallyweaker than what we expected overseas; I think we were looking forsomething on the order of 3-1/2 to 4 percent real output growth in thenon-U.S. OECD countries. I really am getting very gloomy about that;I never thought that they could sustain the situation politically inthose countries with the kind of conditions that exist. But not onlyare they sustaining it, their political strength seems to be growing,which is a really strange phenomenon in these days and times. I don'tthink we can expect much on the export side of the market, and I thinkthat what we put into the growth path as a result probably ought tocome out. That leaves the domestic economy much more dependent upondomestically generated stimulative factors and I think that becomesharder to do when no one else is participating in this real growthprocess, because it runs the risk of exposing our exchange rate andproducing some pressures. Of course, if the rest of the world is-39-7/8-9/86going to pursue recessionary conditions, I am not as concerned aboutthe exchange rate fallout as I would be otherwise.So, I think that is the dilemma we are in. And under thoseconditions, I think price pressures won't be as great. As a matter offact, because of that, I think current nominal interest rates couldtranslate into higher real interest rates than we now think exist. Itmay be the case that what is happening now to the domestic side isthat real interest rates are [higher] than we think they are. I madethis transition too: I also have some concerns about the uncertaintyassociated with tax reform. I think that will pass when we get a billout of the way. But still, there are a lot of factors like this thatwe have to deal with. I would not be worried about the second half.I agree with what Jerry was saying: that everybody expected a weaksecond quarter. We had been forecasting that all the way back sincelast year. The problem is that the early indicators for the thirdquarter don't look good. We are not seeing the kind of evidence thatwe would expect to see in making the transition from a weak secondquarter to a stronger second half. I think that's the problem and thereason that is the problem is what I mentioned earlier--what is goingon abroad. It is almost a helpless feeling to see what is going onabroad and not be able to feel there is something we can do. But Ithink that is the situation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to say something, GovernorWallich?MR. WALLICH. I can't [unintelligible] normal. Allow me nexttime to have a chance.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we have completed our go-around on the business outlook. I don't have anything much to add toit, except I would pick up on the comments that Governor Johnson justmade and that Governor Angell made to some extent. We have had a lotof what seem to me to be shocks--if that is the right word--on thedomestic economy: oil and tax reform are probably depressants; we havebeen looking at overbuilding in construction for a long time andthat's headed south; we have had an awful agricultural situation. Wehave had 3-1/2 years of expansion. I'd say maybe we are overcomingsome of those depressing influences by a rather large amount ofmonetary and financial stimulation, which has its own difficultiesdown the road as to its sustainability.But the key problem is this trade problem. I don't think weare going to solve it by depreciation. That may be necessary over aperiod of time. We have had quite a lot. Without a better businesspicture around the world, I think depreciation in the short run willworsen the business picture abroad as well as be a depressinginfluence now on their economies. Our growth has not been all thatgreat during the first half. However, in the world view it is notbad; in fact, it is better. The most depressing thing to me, in astructural kind of sense, is that our economy is not growing very fastand we are still growing faster than they are abroad--in particularwhen our growth is being undercut by a continuing decline in the tradebalance right up to date. So long as that problem exists, we are on acollision course with something because we can't grow and build up therest of the world when we are starting with a trade balance [deficit]of $140 billion or whatever it is, as opposed to three or four years7/8-9/86ago when we started at close to zero. Over a period of time I thinkthat also is related to the budget problem. But how do we getstimulus abroad? We would like some stimulus here, but it is going tohave to be less than what we get abroad in order to begin working onthe underlying problem; it is a nice trick, which isn't within ourcontrol in any easy way. It is really remarkable [to find] when youtalk to these foreigners how happy they are about the situation. Theyseem to be perfectly content not to have much growth or a bit ofgrowth at the expense of rising trade surpluses.MS. HORN. Paul, would you comment on a strategy that wouldinvolve our easing policy or lowering the discount rate or whatever?What kind of pressure would that put on foreign countries to, say,stimulate their economies?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to presume [that] in ourshort-run policymaking. I want to turn to the long run now, but Iwould say that we are going to have a decline in the discount rate,say this week, if I read the tea leaves correctly. I didn't hearanyone around the table say they were particularly adverse to that.We just ought to assume that. It is all backwards; the foreigncountries ought to be reducing [interest rates] or providing some kindof stimulus. I think many of them would say that ideally they oughtto be getting some fiscal stimulus--that they ought to be reducingtaxes or something. That is what the German monetary people say andthat is probably what the Japanese monetary people feel, but it is notgoing to happen regardless of what is desirable. The second bestapproach for them would be to ease monetary [policy]. Based upon whatI know, if we visibly [act]--say, by changing the discount rate--Iwould assume that the Germans and the Japanese will not respond. Theysay they will not respond. Whether they will or not depends upondevelopments in the market. The idea that we can orchestrate ageneral decline by the Japanese, Germans and ourselves this week ornext week or the following week, I think is just not obvious. I dothink we will see some declines by the French, the British, theSwedes, and maybe by somebody else in Europe, but I don't know whoelse. That may set up, apart from our change, a force that wouldleave the Germans embarrassingly stuck out by themselves and may raise[pressures] on the Japanese. I think economically a change by theFrench, British, and the Swedes won't make much different. But Ithink that is what will happen: there will be a pretty prompt changefrom some secondary countries but not a change by the Germans and theJapanese on round one. We talked vaguely about making a change inSeptember, but that is a little beyond the horizon that seemsimmediately relevant. But I think that is the situation we face.Now, if we talked about a really big discount rate change, I don'tknow whether that would change [the reaction]. But I make thesecomments in the context of a 1/2 point change on the discount rate.That is the way they talk. What the chances are, say, within a twoweek period, that they would feel somewhat forced to change, I thinkdepends largely upon the exchange market and other factors; but thatis not their mood now.Let's turn to the long run, to [M2 and] M3. I don't know towhat degree we can short circuit this [discussion]. We arecomfortably within the ranges for M2 and M3. Does anybody have inmind proposing a change in the M2 and M3 ranges for 1986?7/8-9/86VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we can assume that they stay the sameand dispose of that quickly. Then we move to 1987. That's adifferent page, isn't it?MR. BERNARD. Page 23.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There isn't much difference in what isbeing presented to us but we're free to propose anything betweenkeeping it the same next year or moving it all of one half percentagepoint. I don't detect any enormous economic significance in thedifference between 6 to 9 percent and 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent; theremight be some psychological difference. Obviously, the slightreduction fits in with the idea that we ought to lower the ranges overtime. And if you match this against the forecast--I might mentionthat you all have an opportunity, as usual, to change these forecastsin the next couple of days. So, you ought to review them and seewhether you want to [make any changes] in the light of this meeting.Otherwise, we have a nominal GNP projection by the staff of 6-1/2percent and [forecasts by] everybody else that run over a full rangeof 5 to 8 percent, probably, but [cluster] at 6 to 7-1/2 percent.Either of these proposed ranges for next year seems comfortably toencompass a straight relationship [of money growth] to nominal GNP andwould allow for some decline in velocity.MR. JOHNSON. What has the velocity of M2 been?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, historically, you're looking--MR. JOHNSON. I know it has been around zero.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Historically, it has been pretty close tozero, but it has been declining in the last two years.MR. KOHN. The last several years it has been declining 2 to3 percentage points.MR. JOHNSON. So an 8-1/2 percent upward bound would accountfor that pretty much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends upon which way nominalGNP is running.MR. JOHNSON. If we get a 6-1/2 percent nominal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would allow for it.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I think we can afford to take it down ahalf point from 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a half point obviously shows someprogress toward a lower range. I don't think the substantivedifference is great, but I don't know. Does anybody else want to sayanything?MR. MORRIS. I prefer to keep it unchanged. I think that wewould hope to have substantially larger nominal GNP [growth] next year-42-7/8-9/86than we're going to get this year. This year, with a projection of 5percent nominal GNP [growth], we have M3 in the middle of the range.It doesn't seem to me there's much of a case--if you take those twokey situations--to shrink the ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am not sure one would expect thiskind of decline in velocity to persist in those particular aggregates.Does anybody else want to say anything?MR. ANGELL. Yes, I would agree with Frank. I think we justdon't know at this point. I don't see any reason to change; I don'tthink the gesture of a half point means that much at this point.MR. PARRY. I guess I come out differently. It seems to methat if we want to signal a concern about continuing to make progressagainst inflation, it might be a very good move to reduce it by half apoint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you actually projecting for M2,for what it's worth? I am not sure it's worth all that much;nonetheless, what is the staff projecting for M2 and M3 for the year?MR. KOHN. For 1987?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 1986.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For 1986.MR. KOHN. Around 7-1/2 percent and about the same--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right at the midpoint.MR. KOHN. Yes. And about the same for 1987, within a fewtenths of a point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I presume that, as for Ml, in a much moremoderate way you would assume that M2 and M3 velocity might tend todecline with a significant decline in interest rates.MR. KOHN. That's correct. The larger the decline ininterest rates, the more of a tendency for that. M2 velocity actuallydeclined 3 percent last year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's anybody's guess, but my guess wouldbe that the decline in interest rates is going to be considerablygreater this year than it is likely to be next year. I'm assumingthat we may get some more [rate declines] before the end of this year.MR. JOHNSON. I hope that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just get a general show ofpreferences. This is quite a narrow difference between 6 to 9 percentand 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent. Nobody wants to talk outside that range,I take it. How many would favor 6 to 9 percent? I'll get preferencesfrom everybody now, just for the fun of it anyway. How many preferthe other way? We are going to be pretty evenly split, I am afraid.We have a pretty even split.-43-7/8-9/86VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Do a "could live with"--MR. ANGELL. Our 6 to 9 percent won.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Pardon me?MR. ANGELL. We had 7 or 8 votes for 6 to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't count very carefully butit's pretty close, I think. Does anybody want to make an argument oneway or the other here?MR. JOHNSON. Well, there's not a big difference between thetwo. I was just thinking of the psychological effect: that [a halfpoint reduction] may still be showing a commitment to gettinginflation down at the same time that we may be abandoning Ml. Inother words, an 8-1/2 percent top on the range for M2 would stillallow for a pretty explosive situation with Ml, if we have somethingthat looks like what we got this year. You're saying that M2 isgrowing at a rate of about 7-1/2 percent this year so far, is thatright?MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. And we see what's happened to M1. If thatpattern were to continue, we could still be within our M2 range evenwith that Ml pattern.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is no life or death matter to me, butI come out about where you do as a matter of preference, in terms ofeverything else rising pretty rapidly. I [don't] think we're going toget in great trouble with 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent and it's probablysomewhat better to be in that posture rather than the other. But it'snot a life or death matter; I'm not going to put my body over railroadtracks for a half a percentage point.MR. JOHNSON. Same here.MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to me that even if we had 6 to 9percent, we would have plenty of room to be at the bottom end. If wefind that we can get growth at the bottom end, then I think that's thetime for us to lower the ranges, rather than bring them down a halfpoint and then have to take them up half a point some time. I wouldrather demonstrate that we can do well within that 6 to 9 percentrange. But it's no big deal.MR. GUFFEY. First of all, let me say that I would prefer toleave it at 6 to 9 percent, given a forecast that falls within a verynarrow range for the remainder of 1986 and 1987--and particularlygiven that only a modest acceleration of inflation is being forecast.Furthermore, the fact is that we'll be in the fifth year of arecovery. That wouldn't seem to me to be the time to be moving moneygrowth to the lower level to give the impression that we're going towork against inflation, when indeed the [inflation] forecast is prettymodest for the period ahead.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can say that there's justification formoving it lower; but a few people look at it differently, I guess.7/8-9/86MR. PARRY. It seems to me that if we are possibly going tobecome somewhat more accommodative in the shorter term, then it wouldbe useful to have a message about our continuing concern aboutinflation over the longer term. And I can't think of a better way todo that than to reduce the range for 1987 at the same time that we aregoing to be talking about the possibility of shorter-term ease.MR. ANGELL. Bob, I share your sympathies. And there will bea point in time that I would like to be able to play that card ofreducing the ranges. I just believe there will be another time whenwe will need that emphasis, whereas today we would almost be giving itaway. I would rather use it when the time comes that we need to saywe are going to plant our feet [against] any reinflation. That's whenI want to play that card.MR. JOHNSON. On that point, it seems to me that it mightwork better to lower it now even if we have to give it up later,because right now we're talking about additional short-term ease andit might be good to offset that psychologically with some futurecommitment. We can always play that card if it looks like we're in asituation when we have to later.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have the arguments on the table. Doesanybody have another argument they want to put on the table?MR. MORRIS. The other argument is that it doesn't make aheck of a lot of difference, Mr. Chairman.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I think we would all agree with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me get down to the [preferencesof] Committee members. For 6 to 9 percent: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. For 5-1/2to 8-1/2 percent: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and I count myself with that as mypreference, so, 6. We only have 11 members these days, don't we? Wecan't be any closer than that. That's--MR. ANGELL. Well, we [concede].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If this minority is ready and willing toconcede, we'll assume the 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent. So, it's 6 to 9percent for this year and 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for next year. Letme return to M1. I haven't thought about this exhaustively overnight,but let me try something out just to see whether I am in line roughlywith where I thought the sentiment lay yesterday in not trying todestroy M1 completely. I tried to visualize how this would bepresented in a table; it also would be reflected in the language,obviously. Suppose we leave the 3 to 8 percent for this year and putit in brackets or add a star or maybe both in presenting the table andwe say: "The Committee did not change this target for this year inview of all the uncertainty, but it certainly expects growth to runabove it this year." That's for 1986. For 1987, we could put in atarget and also express a considerable amount of uncertainty. Thatleaves the question, then, of precisely what the target should be.And in the language we would indicate that even though all of thesetargets are tentative, this one is doubly tentative for next year.So, we leave it there in a formalistic sense, but disavow it as havingany real operational significance at this point. The operationalsignificance, with further explanation, would be stated in language7/8-9/86presumably in the [Humphrey-Hawkins] report, and in my statement [toCongress], that we would get more concerned over a rapid increase inM1, if it were accompanied by rapid increases in M2 and M3.MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the converse, too, I guess: that wewould not be particularly concerned in view of all the factors--interest rates and so forth--if a rapid increase in Ml were notaccompanied by excessive growth in M2 and M3. Now, does thatreasonably capture the spirit or not?MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. RICE. That's mine.MS. HORN. Yes.MR. GUFFEY. That contemplates setting a range for 1987?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that contemplates setting a rangefor 1987, but we'll have to discuss what range to put down for 1987.We had two alternative proposals yesterday. One is rather pro-formato keep it at the 3 to 8 percent with all the reservations Isuggested, and Governor Angell resuggested a much wider range of 3 to10 percent. That looks so wide; it looks a little peculiar, unless wecan make it 5 to 10 percent or something. But if you want to make ithigher--MR. BOEHNE. Since we want to keep some link with M1, thoughwe don't have the foggiest notion as to what it ought to be, we oughtnot to be tinkering around with the range up or down 1/2 point or awhole point. It makes more sense to me to keep it at 3 to 8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can. I don't think we shouldfool around by a 1/2 percentage point or something like that. Thatdoesn't make any sense to me.MR. ANGELL. My view on M1 is that when you go back and lookat the data on velocity of money, historically, 6 is a very, very fastvelocity. V1 fell from over 4 for 1918 to under 2 for 1947; that wasa 29-year period that velocity dropped. And, of course--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From when to when?MR. ANGELL. From 1918 to 1947 V1 fell from over 4 to under2, and I don't know where--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's when Milton Friedman wrote hisgreat tome saying there was an inexorable secular decline in velocity.MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At which point it rose from 2 to 4.MR. ANGELL. Yes, but I believe that there is some evidencethat we've entered another period like that [earlier one]. And thereason I want 3 to 10 percent is because I don't know when this7/8-9/86[policy] accommodation we've been implementing for some time mighttake hold. If it does take hold, I'm not going to be satisfied tohave an 8 percent M1 growth path.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that. The point is that it couldbe even greater. Who knows what it could be? I'm just saying: Whynot [leave it]? I would prefer not to even tinker with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever we say for next year--I'm justrepeating myself--will be in brackets or something.MR. JOHNSON. I would almost like to treat that 1987 targetas if we're not really taking it seriously at all until we get closerto that point. Then we will look at it and maybe leave it there.Just indicate in the language that we're leaving it there, but we'rereally going to address it when we get to that point.MR. ANGELL. Well, I think that would be a good idea, too.I'd be glad to postpone the debate until next January or February,because at that point in time we will have more evidence as to whatvelocity might be. If we tend to get a decline in velocity throughoutthis year, then I think a case could be made for that adjustment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm inclined to think we ought to leave itthe same or leave it out. To change it requires too manyexplanations; we would have to explain both why we changed it and thatit doesn't mean much. That's putting an extra burden--MR. ANGELL. Well, I'll switch to the 3 to 8 percent realfast then, because I want it in; I want an M1 range.MR. BLACK. Well, the thing that bothers me, Mr. Chairman, isthat nobody wants M1 growth of 3 to 8 percent. That's not reallyoperationally very significant. As we closed yesterday, I thoughtJerry was making a very good point in arguing for wider ranges andhigher ranges. I personally prefer to rebase. But I'd prefer what hewas suggesting to this because if by chance--and maybe it's a veryremote chance--Ml does reassume some of its previous characteristics,we really don't have anything operational that we can do with this 3to 8 percent target at all, but we could with a larger one. We couldtry to come in under that, if that should happen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For this year, you're talking about?MR. BLACK. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we settled this year. We'retalking about next year.MR. BLACK. Well, I misunderstood that. I knew you suggestedthat, but I didn't realize we had settled it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, from my perspective, theChairman's suggestion accommodates the concern that I had.MR. BLACK. I guess I misunderstood the point that you weremaking.-47-7/8-9/86VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, we can finesse it, but thethrust of this proposal is acceptable to me.MR. PARRY. It seems to me that we all are saying that wedon't have any confidence about the relationship between money and thegrowth of economic activity at this time. Therefore, I don'tunderstand why anyone would try to set a range for 1987 at this time.Is there some procedural reason why it makes sense?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the argument for doing it isjust to keep it in the ball game. Some people feel it may be harderto come back and set a range next year.MR. MORRIS. I question whether we're going to have anybetter basis for setting a range next February than we do today.MR. PARRY. It's possible.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think of it simply as an insurancepolicy, that's all. There could be a set of circumstances some timebetween now and the end of 1987 in which we'd be darn happy to have M1in the ball game. And if we retire it now, it's going to be hard to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But if we leave it out, I presume what wewould say is that we simply are not setting a target now and we willre-examine--MR. PARRY. --before year-end or something like that.MR. JOHNSON. Yes; we could just have language like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. GUFFEY. But if we did re-establish [an M1 range] inFebruary, the markets quite likely would make a lot more out of itthan if we just re-established 3 to 8 percent now and then changed itas we looked at it in February. I would opt to leave 3 to 8 percentin for 1987.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand correctly--on the theorythat it is more important that we [not] fiddle around with it--I thinkthe choice is between leaving it at 3 to 8 percent or leaving it outcompletely. If we leave it at 3 and 8 percent I envision presentingit enclosed in brackets and with an asterisk, footnoting why we haveleft it unchanged for this year. We certainly feel quite open aboutchanging or even not having it at all next year.MR. ANGELL. I like the very way you said it first, with thebrackets and the asterisk and leaving it in. That gives a signal thatwe are going to look at it again in February.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me get a preference among theCommittee members for just leaving it out or for 3 to 8 percent, withsuitable brackets, asterisks, and footnotes. Let me take the 3 to 8percent with brackets and asterisks. Seven. That leaves four on theother side.MS. HORN. And one of those four would be happy either way.7/8-9/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 1, 2, and who's the other? Since thisisn't a big deal, can those four live with it the other way with[unintelligible]? Let's look at the language of the directive. Well,we have this debt question too. Where are we on debt?MR. KOHN. We're above the top of the range right now, atclose to 13 percent, and expect to be there through the year. Ourprojection for the year is around 12, 12-1/4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The range is 8 to 11 percent.MR. KOHN. Yes, 8 to 11 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Last year when we faced the same problem,we said we were going to keep the range the same because we thoughtdebt was too high--that we were going to run above and we reallycouldn't do much about it, but we didn't like it much. There is nodifference now, but we can make it [unintelligible]. Is thatacceptable again for 1986? Do we leave it there and say we are likelyto run above it?MR. ANGELL. Leave it and say we will run above it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But for next year, what are we going todo? Your forecast for next year is what?MR. KOHN. 10 percent, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 10 percent.MR. KOHN. 9-1/2 to 10 percent, or something like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that's what you are actuallyforecasting, it would be within the range.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Look out!MR. STERN. Why are we keeping it at all? We don't doanything with it. We have all sorts of reservations and the guy whosold it to us has bought it back!MR. MORRIS. I recognize my mistakes, which is not true ofall of you!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't you make some money, Frank?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is a little danger in thatargument because the same could be said of M2 and M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if we [should] keep it.Assuming for the moment that we keep it, given the forecast I don'tsee much point in changing it next year. Or are we running too high?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just as an aside, Mr. Kohn, Ithought the work that the staff did on debt was really quite good.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was there anything in there that we coulduse to say debt isn't quite as high as it looks? It still has to look7/8-9/86high relative to GNP, but would it be within our targets withappropriate adjustments?MR. KOHN. No, because the double counting reduces lastyear's growth rate but would actually tend to increase this year's inthe sense that there is less double counting--fewer state and localgovernment purchases of Treasury issues and so forth projected forthis year than last year. So, it is not really going to help. Addingthe equity in does change things a bit.MR. JOHNSON. Can we make a big technological adjustmentfactor?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even the equity, I suppose, wouldn'taffect it much.MR. KOHN. That's right. It was close to 2 percentage pointslast year, and this year it hardly would affect anything at all.MR. JOHNSON. If we mark-to-market relative to householdwealth, doesn't it look a lot better? It does. We can play thecapital gains game.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It depends on whether you did thatMonday or Tuesday.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I guess we waited too long--two days toolong.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody object to leaving it the sameas it is this year? I think the argument against taking it out isthat to some extent that says we don't care about it. Personally, Ido care about it--[not] in the sense that it's going to affect ourpolicy significantly, but I don't like to give a signal that we areperfectly comfortable with the amount of debt being created.MR. ANGELL. If the Chair wants it in, I think we ought tohave it in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it's a big deal, but it'sjust another burden of explanation.MR. JOHNSON. I agree. I would leave it in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The range is 8 to 11 percent now and thelanguage the way this is written is: "The associated range for growthin total domestic nonfinancial debt was retained at 8 to 11 percent."There is no acknowledgement there that it is running high. Thelanguage you showed me this morning, Mr. Kohn, was that assuming wekept the Ml range? I forget.MR. KOHN. No, the language I gave you this morning for 1987was assuming that a range was not set.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am looking at [the language for]Ml now, not debt, in variant I: "In light of these uncertainties andof the substantial decline in velocity in the first half of the year,-50-7/8-9/86the Committee decided that growth in excess of the previously[established range] would be acceptable"--MR. BOEHNE. "Could"--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, "could be acceptable"--[they begin]to look the same--"depending on the behavior of velocity over"--. Iwas wondering whether we should break up that sentence and leave itthe way it is with a "would" or just put a period after "acceptable"and then say "The extent of"--MR. ANGELL. --"the overrun".CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Overrun" or whatever the word is "wouldbe acceptable to the extent that growth would continue to depend uponthe behavior of velocity, growth in the other monetary aggregates,developments in the economy and financial markets, and potentialinflationary pressures" or something like that. I'm not crazy aboutthe word "overrun."MR. ANGELL. "Faster growth."MR. MORRIS. "Such rapid growth."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are talking about relative to therange.SPEAKER(?). Relative to the [unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. "The extent of Ml growth relative to therange"--well, that is still not saying over. "In excess of therange."MR. ANGELL. Overrun describes it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we should just forget about therange. "Acceptable growth in Ml over the remainder of the year willdepend upon...." Or we could just say "The behavior of M1 will bejudged in the light of...."MR. ANGELL. Instead of saying "and potential inflationarypressures" I would put "price movements." I think we want to look atprice movements whether they are up or down.MR. STERN. At the end of that sentence, do you want to saysomething about international developments?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether we will have time tovote, we have so many--! I guess they are about the same. It justsounds a little better to say: "Acceptable growth of Ml, however, forthe remainder of the year will depend on the behavior of velocity,"--we don't have to say "over the balance of the year" because we justsaid "the remainder of the year"--"growth of the other monetaryaggregates, developments in the economy and financial markets, and thedegree of inflationary pressures."MR. ANGELL. Well, inflationary or deflationary. It seems tome that we run the risk that someone could look back and say: These-51-7/8-9/86guys don't realize that they have a deflation going on. I just thinkwe ought to have a balanced approach here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --"and price pressures." That could be ineither direction.MR. ANGELL. And price pressures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we put that last, anyway; wesure don't want to emphasize inflation. Now, turning to debt, I hadwording--MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, in 1984 when the same problem wasfaced--that [time] it had to do with debt and M3 also--this sentencewas put in the directive: "It was anticipated that M3 and nonfinancialdebt might increase at rates somewhat above the upper limits of their1984 ranges, given developments in the first half of the year, but theCommittee felt that higher target ranges would provide inappropriatebenchmarks for evaluating longer-term trends in M3 and credit growth."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Read that to me again.MR. KOHN. Translating it to the situation now: "It wasanticipated that nonfinancial debt might increase at a rate somewhatabove the upper limit of its 1986 range, given developments in thefirst half of the year, but the Committee felt that a higher targetrange would provide an inappropriate benchmark for evaluating longer-term trends in credit growth."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, the debt measure is expected toslow quite a bit after the first quarter.MR. KOHN. Yes. Well, that's partly the carryover effect ofthe strong growth in December that affects the quarterly averagenumbers. But we are looking at growth rates of around 10 or 10-1/2percent for the year on an end-of-period to end-of-period basis. It'snot really slowing all that much, going quarter by quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know if this is any good,but let me try something along these lines: "Given rapid growth in theearly part of the year, the Committee recognized that the increase indebt in 1986 may exceed its monitoring range of 8 to 11 percent butfelt that an increase in that range would provide an inappropriatebenchmark to evaluate longer-term trends in that aggregate." Stickthat at the end. The directive would now read: "The Federal OpenMarket Committee seeks monetary growth..." After the sentence onretaining the 6 to 9 percent we would go to Ml and say: "With respectto M1, the Committee recognized that, based on the experience ofrecent years, the behavior of that aggregate is subject to substantialuncertainties in relation to economic activity and prices, dependingamong other things on the responsiveness of M1 growth to changes ininterest rates. In light of these uncertainties and of thesubstantial decline in velocity in the first half of the year, theCommittee decided that growth in Ml in excess of the previouslyestablished 3 to 8 percent range for 1986 would be acceptable.Acceptable growth in Ml over the remainder of the year will depend onthe behavior of velocity, growth in the other monetary aggregates,developments in the economy and financial markets, and price7/8-9/86pressures. Given its rapid growth in the early part of the year, theCommittee recognized that the increase in debt in 1986 may exceed itsmonitoring range, but felt that an increase in that range wouldprovide an inappropriate benchmark in evaluating the longer-termtrends of that aggregate."Tne trouble with this all is that I can see that Mr. Proxmireis going to say: You have two ranges that are meaningless. What areyou doing here? And so forth and so on.MR. JOHNSON. He has moderated his tone on M1 a bit, though.I noticed when I went up for my confirmation hearing that he hit mehard on the growth of M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Regardless of his tone, procedurally hewill say that we are shirking our duty by expressing such ranges. Thedefense will be: Oh no; we have ranges here for M2 and M3. He won'tbe happy, but I don't know any other way we can handle it.MR. ANGELL. We rely upon you to explain it.MR. JOHNSON. He'll put something in the CongressionalRecord.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He would say the same thing if we had noranges.MR. GUFFEY. I wonder why you use all those words?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Do you really think [we need] adisclaimer for debt? How far over do you think it's going to be?MR. KOHN. Well, we are projecting about 12-1/4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we don't say anything, the obviousquestion is: "Is it going to be within that?" And then I say "No."MR. MORRIS. Well, we don't know. The projection is fairlyclose.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is pretty close, but I don't know. Ifthe projection were 11-1/2 percent, I would say "Yes." If it were 12percent, "I don't know."MR. KOHN. I think we were projecting 11-1/2 percent at theFebruary meeting and that's probably why [the range was retained]; theprojection was close enough to the 11 percent at that time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am going to have to give an explanation,anyway. I am inclined to think some explanation like this is what Iwould have to say.MR. BOEHNE. I suppose it would be too straightforward toraise the range to 8 to 12 percent and say that we think that's abetter fit with what's going on in the economy and in M2 and M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would be a choice. But we couldoverrun that too. These are the choices, I think: raising it, or7/8-9/86dropping it, [or leaving it the same]. Whether we drop it, raise it,or leave it the same, I think we have to say something like this.MR. ANGELL. There might be some sentiment for just droppingit.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's harder to explain.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we drop it, then we have to add quite afew paragraphs saying that we haven't found it very useful.MR. JOHNSON. If we leave it and they ask questions, youcould defend yourself by responding that we haven't had good resultsrelating it to anything that would explain why--MR. MORRIS. We could drop M1 on the same basis.MR. JOHNSON. That's right, but at least there is somehistorical pattern of a relationship there; there has never been--MR. BOEHNE. There's more nostalgia too.MR. ANGELL. M1 is a sacred cow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can't think of anything else for a while,in terms of a pure correlation--MR. JOHNSON. I guess it's rates as well.MR. MORRIS. Ben Friedman sold the debt/income relationshipto me; and then it immediately went [off track]. That's why we may bebetter off not taking up total liquid assets, because I'm afraid--MR. ANGELL. [That's why] they pass sunset laws.MR. JOHNSON. All of these things have been pretty good aslong as the relative prices didn't change. When they did--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think I'll get boxed around theears by Mr. Proxmire. I guess I can survive it. [For debt] we takethis sentence with the language [I read]. Is that right? [For M2 andM3] we keep 6 to 9 percent and we keep [Ml] in the table and the rangeappears as 3 to 8 percent. All we say in the directive is that we aregoing to exceed it. How much we exceed it is not stated for now.Let's vote on that as what we are going to have for 1986.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Melzer YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich Yes-54-7/8-9/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, 1987. The first thing, I think, isthat we don't put M1 in there in the paragraph. "For 1987 theCommittee agreed on tentative ranges of monetary growth, measured fromthe fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth quarter of 1987 of 5-1/2 to8-1/2 percent for M2 and M3." I think I would put the debt lastagain; I'm not sure if it's going to be 8 to 11 percent again, but I'dput it last. Then we would say "With respect to M1 [unintelligible]."MR. JOHNSON. The sentence sounds all right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the sentence sounds all right; but Ithink if we are going to put 3 to 8 percent in the table, we have tosay something about it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just say "With respect to Ml."MR. JOHNSON. I would just add on to that, though, that forthe time being we are carrying forward--MR. ANGELL. I think we ought to leave the sentence that isalready in there with respect to M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the sentence that is in there isall right. I'd take out the word "particularly" and I would take outthe word "reappraisal" and just make it "appraisal." But I think wehave to say something about or precede it with "While the Committeehas plugged in"--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "Carried forward" is kind of apassive [wording].MR. MELZER. "While the tentative 3 to 8 percent range [forMl] has been carried forward, the Committee recognizes"--MR. ANGELL. That does it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why did we pick 3 to 8 percent?MR. ANGELL. Because you rejected my 3 to 10 percent.MR. MELZER. Rather than that, why don't we say "the 3 to 8percent tentative range has been carried forward"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know; maybe I am getting toofancy. But let me try something like this: "While the range of 3 to 8percent for M1 in 1987 would appear appropriate in the light of mosthistorical experience, the Committee recognizes that the particularuncertainties surrounding the behavior of M1 velocity over the morerecent period would require careful appraisal of the target range for1987."MR. ANGELL. That's just perfect.SPEAKER(?). That's great.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Wonderful.SPEAKER(?). A winner; that's pretty fancy.-55-7/8-9/86MR. ANGELL. It doesn't only help us with 1987; I think italso does something about 1986.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am making a big modification in my mind."The Committee recognized the exceptional uncertainties"--that sort ofparticularizes it. Well, does that sound all right? Does anybodyhave anything else to say? We have 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for M2 andM3. Debt we can keep the same or make it less; it was 8 to 11percent. For 1987, we can keep Ml the same [as for 1986]; we are notsaying whether we are setting it as a tentative range or not. Itdepends on what we want to do. And in the table we would put [therange] in brackets with an asterisk. Are we ready to vote?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Melzer YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger NoGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We better go have a donut and return. Ido think, with regard to the short run, that I personally would makethe assumption that the discount rate will be reduced in a few days.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how many of you read that[staff memo] on debt. The question is whether an abbreviated versionof that should be added to the Humphrey-Hawkins report as an appendix.[Secretary's Note: Several members expressed agreement.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who wants to say something about theshort-run posture?MR. BOEHNE. Well, given all that has been said about theeconomy, I'm for alternative A with a 6 percent discount rate and a$300 million borrowing figure.MR. PARRY. That puts the funds rate about where?MR. BOEHNE. 6-1/2 percent isn't it? Or is it less?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see any reason not to assume thatthe funds rate would go down as much as the discount rate.MR. BOEHNE. 6-3/8 percent, then.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would support that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.-56-7/8-9/86MR. MELZER. Could I just clarify a procedural issue? Forexample, the discount rate issue aside, I would be in favor ofmaintaining the existing degree of restraint. It becomes a curioussort of thing. One could argue that what Ed just expressed apreference for was an unchanged degree of reserve restraint, with the$300 million borrowing target, but with a different assumption on thediscount rate. I will address my comments to that, but it's a littletricky in terms of how the record reads and what we ultimately votefor, it seems to me.MR. PARRY. But that's not an unchanged degree of restraintif the discount rate is down and we maintain borrowing at $300million.MR. JOHNSON. You would want a higher level of borrowings.MR. PARRY. You would want a higher level of borrowings.MR. MELZER. Yes, but I don't know how I can vote for anaction that presumes something that hasn't occurred yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me suggest something in thatconnection, just in terms of clarifying the record. To me it seemsvery awkward--and undesirable--to put in the directive some actionthat hasn't been taken yet, however probable it may be. But I don'tsee anything the matter with making clear in the record of the meetingthat many people suggested--if that's the way it comes out--anunchanged degree of reserve restraint on the assumption that thediscount rate is reduced and that when it is reduced, they presumablymight be in favor of a lesser degree of reserve restraint. But [thereshould be] something in the record so that when people read the recordit says that decision was made in the light of an anticipatedreduction in the discount rate, without actually putting it in thedirective. Now, people may have different opinions about the discountrate; but if that is the underlying assumption, I think that ought tobe clear in the record someplace, whatever the directive says.MR. ANGELL. We might say "in view of the anticipatedreduction in interest rates"--it wouldn't have to be the discountrate--in order for the $300 million borrowing number to make sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would resist putting that in thedirective with [unintelligible].MR. BOEHNE. That's a bear trap.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I think it can be made clear in thepolicy record, if that's what we are assuming and if that were thebasis--for many people anyway--for however they voted.MR. BOYKIN. There's a way around this, if the Board wantedus to leave for a few minutes.MS. SEGER. Kill two birds with one stone.MR. MELZER. Anyway, I'll tell you what my main concern is.I am sensitive to some of the political considerations at this timeand also to the views of other Committee members about the7/8-9/86uncertainties and concerns. What concerns me the most is this: Wehave just received the court ruling on Gramm-Rudman, which could havea major effect on the psychology in the markets about deficit cuts;and we have experienced lately a weakness in the dollar and have heardreports about the possibility of a diminished willingness offoreigners to hold dollar-denominated securities, given shrinkinginterest rate differentials, and so forth. I think there could be aconsiderable risk, because of these two developments taken together,in our moving at this time to reduce our rates; it sounds as if itmight be unilateral, at least for a while.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it will be quite unilateral,but it will be with minor actors rather than major actors.MR. MELZER. That concerns me. We have been worried fromtime-to-time, to a greater or lesser extent, about the risk of losingcontrol of the dollar on the down side. To think only about thedollar having been under pressure maybe wouldn't be enough, but if youtake that against the backdrop of the Gramm-Rudman decision and thisbeing an election year, I worry a little about that psychology in thecontext of what probably will be viewed as a continuing stimulativefiscal policy and a monetary policy that moves toward furtheraccommodation. Beyond that, I expressed my views on the economybefore. I probably will reduce my projection but I think [the lowergrowth] is still at an acceptable rate. And I would argue that withthe current borrowing target we have run a very accommodative monetarypolicy. Just to pick up on your point, Wayne, about not resistingrates adjusting to market levels: One might even argue that havingpumped in reserves at a rate of 22 percent or so over the last threemonths, we might be resisting what would be a natural upward movementin the funds rate, not a downward movement. I don't want to make abig argument out of that particular point, but the point is that wehave been adding reserves at a very rapid rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sorry to interrupt, but I want to raise aprocedural point. We were going to invite the Justice Departmentlawyer who is defending us, hopefully, in this [Melcher] suit to comeover after lunch. But he couldn't come after lunch. I don't knowwhat the chances are that we will be finished by 12:30 p.m. or 12:45p.m. today. We may run into the time of the luncheon for Mr. Axilrod.MR. MELZER. So you want the short version! I have just twoother points. I would also question, in terms of looking at the nextsix months, what impact a reduction in rates is really going to have.I am not sure it's going to have a very significant impact in terms ofreal output in the short run. The numbers that Jim gave us yesterdayon what the inflationary impact might be out in 1988--whether youbelieve them or not, and I realize there are a lot of [unintelligible]between here and there--[lead me to] think that we are getting down toa relatively few bullets left to fire in terms of monetary policy. Idon't know where we cross that ragged edge of tipping expectationsover, but my sense is that we are getting preciously close to that.And with that in mind, I am not sure I would trade my flexibilityright now because if this one goes through and there continue to beweak numbers, we will get jumped again. So, I don't know where oneshould make one's stand, but those would be my reasons to argue forthe existing degree of reserve restraint, alternative B.-58-7/8-9/86MR. BLACK. I agree completely with Tom, but I think thediscount rate decision precludes our doing that, so I think we have noalternative but to go with "A" or something akin to it. But I thinkhis case is persuasive; we have done all we can, I think.MR. RICE. I would like to join Tom on that too for the mostpart. I agree with most of what he said.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we have a theoretical action. If thediscount rate is reduced, we can increase the reserve restraint alittle. As for the argument about changing the discount rate and theeffect on the economy, we haven't got a good choice. There isobviously a lot to these arguments. If it were entirely up to us--ifyou conceive of it as I do--the question is whether we have any chanceof getting some improvement abroad. To a considerable extent, thedilemma for us is that it may [depend] less on our policy than onother people's policies. And this is going in reverse from the way itshould go. I don't deny that for a minute. But it's not going to gowithout our moving. It is also true that we are not going to get animmediate response, as near as I can see it, from the Germans and theJapanese. But should we properly sit here and say: "Well, if you arenot going to move--and at least as aggressively or more aggressivelythan we move--we are not going to do anything"? Where are ourresponsibilities? [Rather than] sit here saying that, we can take achance that we can push them a little, given the risks that youeloquently described, which I think are there. It's a question ofwhere the risks lie. I don't think the change--unless it's a muchbigger one--is going to have any very significant effect on our short-run or intermediate-term business outlook. Does it have an effect ontheirs? It goes in that direction. Maybe it's not very powerful;it's a pretty weak reed, but it's the only reed we have. It's theonly argument we can make.MR. JOHNSON. I agree wholeheartedly with what you aresaying. I think that's the whole issue. It's almost a feeling ofbeing held hostage by our trading partners. [That's been the case]for almost five years now, really. How long are we going to stayhostage in that situation when at some point we have various domesticconcerns? You are right; there is the risk that you described. But Iam a bit more optimistic. I agree that a half point on the discountrate, if it's followed by a $300 million borrowed reserve level, isnot going to change the world by any means. Still, I think it's morethan just hitting the interest-sensitive sectors that are alreadyrunning almost full out. It was pointed out by the staff that to someextent the lower interest rates have been offset by tax reform andthat the cost of capital really has been relatively unchanged. And Ithink we could affect that efficiency of investment at the margin withan interest rate decline. As you say, it's not going to change theworld; but it certainly could do more for new orders than what we havebeen seeing. That's the way I am looking at it--that hopefully itcould add some pressure at the margin--even though it sounds like weare going to have to wait until the fall.MR. RICE. Maybe a 1 percent discount rate reduction would domore.MR. JOHNSON. There's no doubt about that. The only otherpoint would be the additional psychological [effect]. I don't think7/8-9/86we want to look panicky; we want to look confident in what we aredoing and not like we made a mistake and now are trying to get aheadof the ball game. But you are right; a 1 percent discount ratereduction would exert more pressure abroad if it affected [theiractions], but if they chose not to--MR. RICE. And do more about the cost of capital.MR. JOHNSON. That's right.MR. RICE. If we really want to do something, or if we thinkthat we have things to do that we should do--MR. JOHNSON. Yes, but I think we have to draw the line tooon the potential. I agree with that.MR. RICE. I just don't think we need to--MR. JOHNSON. That obviously can be carried to the extreme,to the point where one has done too much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have a practical question. Idon't know how we can resolve it here. If the discount rate does godown and the constellation of psychology is such that the dollar getsin a lot of trouble and the others don't move, there's a question ofwhether the assumption we make here should be changed in the market.MR. STERN. Or, we could nudge up the borrowing target a bitinitially, particularly on the argument that over time we would liketo see more done abroad than here. It sort of sets the stage forthat, at least initially, and then we can play it from that position.MR. RICE. But we wouldn't get the reduction in the fundsrate.MR. JOHNSON. We would have a growing disparity--MR. STERN. It would come up in the middle somewhere.MR. JOHNSON. That's the problem. There would be a growingdisparity between the funds rate and the discount rate and we wouldhave to [unintelligible] if we wanted to--MR. STERN. The funds rate would be at a somewhat lower levelthan it is today, but we wouldn't let the full 50 basis point[reduction in the discount rate] show through.MR. JOHNSON. No, but the gap would widen.MR. STERN. Yes, the gap would widen; that's right. And thatmight be a little initial insurance on the performance of the dollar.MR. JOHNSON. The only problem is that I think that might beinterpreted very bearishly.MR. MORRIS. I think the foreign exchange market has alreadydiscounted, largely, a 1/2 point reduction. A one percentage pointreduction would surprise them. Gretchen, what is your view on this?7/8-9/86Certainly, a one percentage point reduction would be a surprise in theforeign exchange market; but what about a 1/2 point reduction?MS. GREENE. I think you have to distinguish between what themarket is expecting and the announcement effect even when an expectedaction is taken. I think the market is pretty much expecting a 1/2point reduction, but the announcement of a 1 percentage point dropwould have an immediate impact, particularly if what happens herecomes sooner than the market might have thought.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think the market--or at least agood part of the market--also thinks that a half point would be morecoordinated than what we are talking about right now.MR. RICE. I'm sorry, I didn't understand.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think the market probably expectsthat, if we come down a half point, at least one of the other twomajor countries would do the same.MR. JOHNSON. I think the expectation is that Japan may dosomething. They don't seem to be indicating that they want to dosomething, which may be of some surprise in the exchange market. Butthat's the whole question.MR. MORRIS. If there were a major decline in the dollar,wouldn't that put very heavy pressure on the Germans and the Japaneseto go along with this reluctantly?MR. ANGELL. Absolutely. Japan is going to be in thereintervening and, of course, whether or not that does any good remainsto be seen. But if they don't do any good with intervention--if theysterilize all of their intervention--they will end up having some verylow yielding returns in the United States. So, we put some pressureon them. It seems to me that the elasticity of their exports inregard to their exchange rates is much more sensitive than ours,[unintelligible] improvement of our balance of trade. So it seems tome that Japan eventually will have a jolt if they do not take action.MR. JOHNSON. They would be setting their domestic economy upfor a real ride.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The danger in the whole situation--and Idon't know how to avoid it--is that if we do have a real decline inthe dollar and they are not very eager to act, their business outlookmay deteriorate from what it is now.MR. JOHNSON. I think it will.MR. ANGELL. That's correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they don't act, then we are worse off.But I think that's not demonstrable until it happens.MR. JOHNSON. Right.MR. ANGELL. But it seems to me that with a cut in [our]discount rate at this point, when the market finds out that Japan and7/8-9/86Germany haven't cut theirs we could expect some real pressure on theyen to appreciate further. I don't see how that can be avoided. Butthat does put pressure where it belongs; and I think that they will berational people and, in that environment, that they will move.MR. JOHNSON. If they continue not to move and if they lettheir economic situation deteriorate domestically, at some point weconceivably could end up in a situation like 1983, when they werelagging so badly and our stimulative effects actually led to astrengthening of the dollar. Boy, we would really get a trade problemout of that! In other words, it could be perceived that they weregetting so weak that it would weaken their own currency. And then wewould have a strengthening dollar in a situation of the United Statesmoving [toward ease] relative to those countries. It might be adouble whammy on the trade side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think what we are saying is thatall of this isn't very predictable.MR. ANGELL. But I will go with alternative A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what alternative A reallymeans. I guess I don't have much faith in projecting these numbers tothe last percent. I take it that it ought to mean $300 million to--MR. ANGELL. It means the $300 million; I don't think weought to change the degree of reserve pressure. If we lowered that to$200 million, I think it would be a little more difficult to run theDesk than keeping $300 million.MR. THIEKE. It certainly becomes a trickier process to tryto control the relationships at that level of borrowing.MR. ANGELL. So to me it would make sense for us to keep the$300 million--maintain the same pressure that we have had--and do whatwe want to do with the discount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, that's the way I come out, Mr.Chairman. I am not sure what alternative A means in terms of theseBluebook specifications, but I do think there is a case domesticallyfor monetary accommodation--even though it is not going to cure all ofthe problems in every sector of the economy. I have been preachingpatience for a long time but my patience is running out. So, I thinkwe need to try to give the economy a little kick, and I would do itthrough a lowering of the discount rate to 6 percent. And I wouldkeep the borrowing at $300 million. If the Board doesn't lower thediscount rate, then we have to come down to a frictional level ofborrowing if we are going to provide more accommodation. I think thatwould not be desirable, so I would like to see a discount rate cut and$300 million of borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. I am for a $300 million borrowing level. I amassuming a 50 basis point drop in the discount rate, essentially for-62-7/8-9/86the international reasons--the effort to get into that business alittle and see how things develop.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Seger.MS. SEGER. I am for alternative A with a $300 millionborrowing target and a swift cut in the discount rate. I do thinkthat lower rates would have some beneficial effects on the economy,particularly in the capital spending area. With the changes comingfrom tax reform--assuming they materialize--there would be lowerreturns on investment. Therefore, to the extent that funds can beborrowed at a lower rate, that would increase the number of projectsthat become feasible; so, I think it would have that impact. Also, Ithink it would make it easier for debtors to carry their existing debtburdens at lower rates, whether they are farmers or home buyers orwhatever. So, I favor "A."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. I would favor the recommendation of Bob Forrestaland Karen Horn: reducing the discount rate by 50 basis points andmaintaining the borrowings at $300 million. I hope that we wouldcharacterize that as a lesser degree of reserve restraint because itis.MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. As a matter of fact, what funds rate would beconsistent with that in your opinion? It should be about the same asthe discount rate, but I just wondered if the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I would be counted in the alternative A [camp]with a discount rate decrease and $300 million on borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else have anything to say?MR. JOHNSON. May I? I don't know if I expressed my [view].I'm for alternative A, which is a $300 million level on borrowing.MR. RICE. If we weren't going to reduce the discount rate, Iwould be in favor of alternative B.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So would I.MR. RICE. But given the reduction, I would have to go alongwith alternative A. I don't know yet how I am going to vote on thediscount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else want to say anything? Wehave some other issues. One is how to express all this. I think weare interpreting alternative A very loosely at this point, until I getinstructed [by you] otherwise. Why don't we look at the directive? Idon't know how to interpret the sentiment [on borrowing] if thediscount rate were not reduced. Those people who have said a $300million borrowing level, would they be inclined to say less than a-63-7/8-9/86$300 million borrowing level? I am not sure that's the preferablecourse; I am not suggesting that. I just want to get theoretically--MR. GUFFEY. The answer to that is "yes," as far as I amconcerned.MR. FORRESTAL. Yes, it would be for me too. But I think youpointed out the practical problem. What do we do with a frictionalborrowing level of $150 million?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to make sure that I'm notimposing something on you. People are saying--if they think we oughtto be making some move in the easing direction--that it should comepreferably through the discount rate rather than a lowering of theborrowing.MR. JOHNSON. It makes a lot more sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose the question that arises rightin the first sentence--there is an awful lot of crossing out [in thedraft and] it is a little hard to read. There may be some ambiguity,however much we explain it. [We can] explain it in the overall recordbut there is still some question, technically. If we say unchangedborrowings, is that the same as saying unchanged degree of pressure onreserve positions? If not, I don't know how to reword this withoutsaying the discount rate is--MR. PARRY. Just say that we are going to try to achieve alesser degree of reserve restraint. For practical purposes, that[discount rate reduction] causes the funds rate to go down 50 basispoints.MR. JOHNSON. Do we have to quote a borrowed reserve target?SPEAKER(?). No, we never do; just leave it out.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The first sentence is still aproblem because, as always, it says "maintain" or "increase" or"decrease." That is the--MR. MORRIS. Couldn't we have a sentence in there saying thatwe interpret the same level borrowing with a lowered discount rates tomean a lessening in reserve pressures?SPEAKER(?). We have a reserve--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can say that in the overall record.MR. JOHNSON. I think the thing to do is to leave thesentence as we have it in the beginning and say "decrease somewhat thedegree of pressure on reserve positions." We are not reporting theborrowed reserves target, so--MR. ANGELL. Because we are decreasing it from where it was.MR. JOHNSON. If we actually published the $300 millionborrowed reserves target, it would be hard to interpret that as adecrease in reserve pressures. But if we are not reporting the7/8-9/86borrowed reserves target and say "decrease reserve pressuressomewhat," then--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let's say: "The Committee seeks oneway or another to decrease reserve pressures."MR. JOHNSON. That's right. That is just saying that theCommittee is reducing reserve pressures and it is not saying how.SPEAKER(?). I think that is all we've got to do.SPEAKER(?). I agree with that.SPEAKER(?). That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How can we say [the Committee] decreasedreserve pressures? Maybe the Federal Reserve System did, but theCommittee did not.MR. JOHNSON. But since we--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we took the opposite course. "Inthe implementation of open market operations for the immediatefuture"--MR. BLACK. That has the elements working against each other.MR. ANGELL. Well, we could say "maintained [the existingdegree of pressure on reserve positions], consistent with lowerpatterns of interest rates."MR. JOHNSON. That is what we have been trying to avoid allthese years.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have been trying to avoid beingspecific about a borrowing target and being specific about interestrates.MR. BLACK. Couldn't we approach it this way? The consensusof the group seems to be that we want to ease reserve pressures. Iftomorrow the Board approves a cut in the discount rate, then we do itone way; if the Board doesn't, then we do it with a lower borrowedreserve target. The Committee doesn't have to address that at thispoint. As Manley said, I think all we need to put in there is"decrease." Since we never specify our borrowed reserve target in anyof these--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, presumably we would say if[unintelligible] exactly the same borrowings. It is going to beconfusing as the devil to people.MR. ANGELL. The reason we would have the same borrowingswould be because after we voted to decrease reserve pressures somewhatthe Board lowered the discount rate. That would make it necessary togo back and--MR. RICE. We don't hit the borrowing target exactly anyway--7/8-9/86VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We are only off by $15 million.MR. BOEHNE. Well, there is a very precise way to say it: "Inthe implementation of policy, etc., the Committee seeks to decreasesomewhat the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions giventhe current discount rate:" or alternatively, "seeks to maintain theexisting degree of pressure on reserve positions given a decline inthe discount rate."MR. ANGELL. We said ["maintain"] in December.MR. JOHNSON. That is actually not true. If the discountrate is lowered, we are not maintaining the same degree of reservepressure.MR. BOEHNE. Well, it depends on how you define it. If youdefine it in terms of borrowings, we are. If you define it in termsof the amount of reserves put into open market--MR. JOHNSON. You are right. But we have to spell it outthen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we just added on here: "In theimplementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeksto decrease somewhat the existing degree of pressure on reservepositions, taking account of the possibility of a decline in thediscount rate."MR. BOEHNE. That's the way to do it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We could even just say "takingaccount of the level of the discount rate." That covers thepossibility that the Board, in its wisdom, doesn't want to lower thediscount rate.MR. BOEHNE. We are taking account of possible changes in thediscount rate. That's the way to do it.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, you could say something about easierconditions in reserve markets to get away from this "degree ofpressure" language that seems to be confusing. For example: "TheCommittee seeks somewhat easier conditions in reserve markets takingaccount of etc." In the past "pressures" has been a stand-in for theborrowing objective. We have said "maintain" even when the discountrate has gone down or been about to go down before and that would showthrough in the federal funds rate.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What was your language again? Itwas the best idea.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To just say "decrease the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions taking account of the possibility ofa change in the discount rate."MR. ANGELL. That is fine. That hits the spot. It is notquite the level of writing you did earlier, but---66-7/8-9/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it can be explained in the policyrecord. "For growth in M2 and M3 over the period as a whole--". Iwould resist going from [the existing language of] annual rates ofabout 8 to 10 percent, which are nice [round] numbers, to whatever wehave [in the Bluebook]--8-3/4 percent and 7-3/4 percent.MR. BOEHNE. 7 to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7 to 9 percent.MR. ANGELL. That's fine.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you want to dissent, dissent now.Well, let me try something on the Ml, since I think it is consistentwith what we just said. Instead of putting in a number for Ml, whatif we say "Growth in M1 will be judged in part in light of changes inM2 and M3," or something like that? I suppose there is some chancethat if we put in this high number for Ml, we'll come in below it. Weare starting July pretty low; on the other hand, if we come in wayabove--MR. ANGELL. Yes, with a cut in the discount rate--if theelasticity of the demand for money is anything like it has been--weare probably going to get another boost.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will accept that. There is a goodchance that it will come in way below or way above.MR. JOHNSON. Well, your language doesn't pin us down to anumber.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. How about saying: "The growth of M1is expected to moderate from its extraordinary pace in the secondquarter. Its behavior will be evaluated in the light of..." I don'tthink we want to leave the message that a 20 percent growth rate orsomething--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was it in the second quarter?MR. KOHN. I think it was about 17-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "While growth in M1 is expected tomoderate somewhat"--MR. ANGELL. We've been wrong before.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --"it will continue to be judged in thelight of the behavior of M2 and M3 and other factors." All right. Idon't see anything the matter in general with the proposal that Mr.Kohn or somebody made here in capital letters: "Somewhat greaterreserve restraint" etc. That about covers it. It doesn't say what todo if we get strength in the business expansion and powerfuldevelopments in the exchange markets.MR. JOHNSON. It still leaves uncertain what we would do in asituation where M1 continued to explode and M2 and M3 did okay and theeconomy kept declining. I am just saying that is not covered in here;I hope we don't have to face that.-67-7/8-9/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is covered by inference. We're notgoing to pay much attention to Ml, if it is not confirmed by M2 andM3.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I was just thinking about this onesentence here that says: "Somewhat lesser restraint might beacceptable in the context of a marked slowing in money growth andpronounced sluggishness in economic performance."SPEAKER(?). That's out.MR. JOHNSON. All that in the brackets comes out? I see.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We still have the question of "woulds" or"mights." I would make it the same for both. Any preference between"would" and "might"?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would make both "might."MR. JOHNSON. I think that is the safest.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A final issue is the federal funds raterange, which we changed to 5 to 9 percent last time. The midpoint of5 to 9 percent is 7 percent.MR. ANGELL. This will take us down to 6 percent to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, we are going to be well withinthis range, but I don't know where.MR. BOEHNE. Would 4 to 8 percent be consistent with it?MR. ANGELL. Let's say 4 to 8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 4 to 8 percent or 5 to 9 percent.MR. MELZER. How about 3 to 10 percent?MR. ANGELL. That combination does not apply with the world[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How about 5 to 8 percent?MR. JOHNSON. 5 to 8 percent doesn't really fly. Well, Idon't know; I guess it is getting closer to the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could make that big policy change ofnarrowing the range all the way to 3 percentage points!MR. PARRY. I don't understand what you accomplish by doingthat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It goes half way to 4 to 8 percent and itdoes center the range sort of where we expect the rate to be. It iscloser to the center of what we want.MR. ANGELL. So just leave it the same, 5 to 9 percent.7/8-9/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Leave it the same?MR. FORRESTAL. If we change it, we might be suggesting thatwe anticipated a discount rate change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We already did that.MR. JOHNSON. It is spelled out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have already said that we areanticipating a decrease by the words "taking account of a discountrate change." And we are saying if the discount rate doesn't change,we want an easing of pressures. In no--MR. PARRY. How would a narrowing of the range beinterpreted?MR. BLACK. That we are moving closer toward a federal fundstarget.MS. SEGER. Typographical error!MR. ANGELL. I don't think we ought to tell anybody what weare doing!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it could be interpreted asmuch--MR. PARRY. I think there probably will be about threearticles in the financial journals talking about it, saying we aregetting closer to interest rate targeting or something like that.MR. BLACK. That's the main significance.MR. RICE. It might be interpreted as tightening.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would leave it the way it is, butI really don't care. There are three possibilities: 4 to 8 percent, 5to 8 percent, or 5 to 9 percent.MR. PARRY. Let's vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who prefers 4 to 8 percent? It's going tobe more than one-third.MR. JOHNSON. I'll throw my vote in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who prefers 5 to 9 percent? Who prefers 5to 8 percent? You really want 4 to 8 percent? Okay, put in 4 to 8percent. Should I read all this over again? "In the implementationof policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to decreasethe existing degree of pressure on reserve positions, taking accountof the possibility of a change in the discount rate. Growth in M2 andM3 over the period from June to September is expected to be at annualrates of 7 to 9 percent. While growth in M1 is expected to moderatesomewhat from the exceptionally large increase during the secondquarter, that growth will continue to be judged in the light of thebehavior of M2 and M3. Somewhat greater or lesser reserve restraint69-7/8-9/86might be acceptable depending upon the behavior of theaggregates...etc." And we have 4 to 8 percent [for the funds raterange]. If there are no other comments, we will vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Melzer NoPresident Morris YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we are finished.END OF MEETING-70-