Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 15-16, 1986A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Monday, December 15, 1986, at 3:30 p.m. and continuingon Tuesday, December 16, 1986, at 9:15 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. GuffeyMr. HellerMrs. HornMr. JohnsonMr. MelzerMr. MorrisMs. SegerMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis,Kohn, Prell and Siegman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account12/15-16/86Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director forMonetary and Financial Policy, Board of GovernorsMr. Simpson, Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Oltman, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. Broaddus, Lang, Scheld, Rosenblum, and Ms. Tschinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofRichmond, Philadelphia, Chicago, Dallas, andAtlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Beebe, Fieleke, and Miller, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Boston, andMinneapolis, respectivelyMr. Guentner, Securities, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofDecember 15-16, 1986December 15, 1986--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to approve the minutes. Noobjections. Foreign currency operations.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.] Mr. Chairman, I haveno transactions [to be approved].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or comments?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Cross was so clear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With all this silence, we'll go todomestic open market operations.MR. HELLER. One quick question: You mentioned the Japanese-U.S. agreement. So far, has all of that been holding together on theexchange rate side just by the market perception that there could beintervention?MR. CROSS. No, I think there have been other factorsinvolved. There is the feeling that the yen really had moved quitefar in terms of the situation in Japan. I think there is anexpectation that further movement could lead to some developmentswithin Japan that would cause more problems there. I don't think ithas been done just with smoke and mirrors. I think there has been adifference in the actual impact of the exchange rate changes that haveoccurred in Japan vis-a-vis the effect of the exchange rate changesthat have occurred between the United States and the Europeans.MR. HELLER. You don't see, say, capital flows into theUnited States now to a greater extent because there is greaterconfidence that there would be--MR. CROSS. We are still seeing capital flows into the UnitedStates from Japan; we have seen them all along. The one factor thathas changed is the extent to which these inflows are offset, ineffect, by measures in the exchange market to hedge against furtherexchange rate changes. But we are still seeing the inflows.MR. HELLER. Do you see that hedging more or less?MR. CROSS. The hedging? Well, going back to when the dollarwas considerably higher, there was a lot of hedging taking place. Wedon't really have very good information on all of this, so what I amtelling you is what we deduce and what the Japanese tell us. Justafter the middle of this year, when the exchange rate had changed agreat deal--the dollar was, say, at 150 yen as compared to 260--therewas a change in their attitude about hedging against this, and theywere taking some of their profits. Now it is a little uncertain as towhether they are still investing on a hedged basis or whether they aretaking some risks.12/15-16/86MS. SEGER. What about looking ahead on swap lines? Onereads a lot about Brazil, Argentina, and the Philippines. Do weanticipate being asked by them for swap lines?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's never impossible. The Philippinesare not actually asking for money--just refinancing.MS. SEGER. Is there still quite a bit of activity in theforeign exchange markets around the year-end by multinationalcorporations? I remember that used to be the pattern.MR. CROSS. There are still some purchases of dollars bycompanies to kind of balance off their balance sheets at the end ofthe year. That is one of the factors that seem to have caused thedollar to show some strength recently because, as I was saying, asthese corporations buy dollars the banks don't really seem to want tochange their positions very much. So it goes right through the marketand tends to have an impact on the rate and to send the dollar up alittle. That has been a factor tending to strengthen the dollar sofar as we can tell in the last couple of weeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's go back to this swap question, justto avoid any misunderstanding. I answered on behalf of the UnitedStates; The Federal Reserve hasn't done swaps with anybody exceptMexico anyway. The United States has, the Treasury also--it's kind ofa division of labor.MR. MORRIS. We don't even have a swap line with Brazil.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have agreed to a lot of Mexican ones.MS. SEGER. Did the other banks sign on yet for the Mexicancredit? Or is that still a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have reached that critical mass, butstill haven't got the uncritical mass. A lot of significant banks arenot in.MS. SEGER. But the uncritical is still out there?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are a lot of these LDC things comingtogether. The Philippines has just been hanging there; that's just arefinancing. Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Ecuador, and Venezuela haveall come together and the mood is not good. It depends on how oneinterprets it. Paying off some--MR. JOHNSON. What is the feeling about Brazil? Is there agrowing feeling that they need a significant amount of new money?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is impossible to judge. Theyran into a very bad time. The story of Brazil is they have to[unintelligible] for a while; instead of saying inflation went away,it was frozen out of the system. They have had very rapid [inflation]growth this year. Furthermore, there was a great loss of confidencein the weeks before the election. People knew they were going to havea program. They had capital flight and their trade position went tothe devil, partly because of leads and lags and partly just becausedomestic growth was so bad. They lost a lot of reserves over the12/15-16/86course of the month, or 6 to 8 weeks. So when they finally took themeasures--and I think they haven't lost any reserves since then andthey probably have regained some--they were pretty well depleted, inthe sense of what they think they need anyway. So their confidencethat they can get through next year without significant new moniesfrom the banks has evaporated. But how much they really need depends.The IMF patted them on the back on their program; there is no formalway [unintelligible] Paris for rescheduling. Rescheduling is fullyanticipated but no money which is [unintelligible]. Whether this newmoney is $2 billion or $4 billion--MR. JOHNSON. But they don't anticipate any furtheradjustments to meet the financing as conditions [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They may have some [unintelligible]measures growing out of this program but they don't want to agreespecifically to part of this rain dance--kabuki dance, I guess, is amore apt description--where they took these millions that they more orless thought would be approved by the international [unintelligible].It is quite a big program; it is very disturbing and it is mostlyexcise taxes, what little excise taxes apply. You stick a 100 percenttax on automobiles, and I guess a 70 percent tax on some other items,so you get this tremendous price distortion.MR. JOHNSON. They devalued a couple of times.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a small devaluation. They did asmall devaluation to keep up with their own inflation, which is risingagain. They manipulated the price indices so that these things thatare really whacked will not be so heavily weighted in the price indexfor poor people so they won't have to raise wages. But it is a bigprogram in terms of the budgetary impact, if they can carry itthrough--if people don't stop buying cars, which is one of the risks[given that] so much of the revenue comes from cars and otherdurables. They really whacked these out of sight in terms of thetaxes; other things they didn't tax at all and continue to subsidize.Some internal distortions in the program [unintelligible] that just insheer budgetary magnitude may be 4-1/2 percent of the GNP; I guessthey already said 3-1/2 percent.MR. HELLER. The sad thing is that they are going back toindexation, at least partially. If you didn't weight--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the big thing in this program, ofcourse, was to pretty much get rid of it and then they took anotherstep to try to get rid of the last debts. And that is what they areback on, informally. They took a massive step to get rid of it, soyou wonder whether they will do some more backsliding. That is right.The actual backsliding compared to what they had is very small.MR. TRUMAN. The latest measures didn't include any newindexation. In fact, they took off [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you will find they put somethingback on.MR. HELLER. I think they allowed bank deposits back. Dothey link back to--12/15-16/86MR. TRUMAN. Well, they changed the taxation of certaindeposits so you didn't get taxed on inflation--on a portion of theinterest rate. Look at that as just not taxing the inflation portionof the interest base. Taxation limited [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]MR. JOHNSON. Mr. Sternlight does have a sense of humor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions?SPEAKER(?). Peter, [do you see] any shift in the maturitiesthat the Japanese in particular seem to be buying?MR. STERNLIGHT. I heard more about them coming into themarket after that Baker/Miyazawa agreement that Sam referred to. I amnot aware of any great shift in the maturity area. They certainlyhave been interested in the intermediate and longer end and I guess ifanything there perhaps has been a little renewal of interest in thelonger end. Early in the year they were in the long end, and thenwere more in the intermediate area, and have shifted back somewhat tothe long end, or a mixture of different areas anyway now.MS. SEGER. Could you just educate me on a rather basicpoint? It seems to me that when CRR was introduced--almost threeyears ago or whenever it was--that one of the points made at the timewas that it would give the Fed the opportunity and the ability tobetter control reserves and the money supply. And yet as I heardiscussions on an ongoing basis it sounds as if we [still] haveproblems forecasting or estimating required reserves, etc. So, did Iget the message wrong almost three years ago or has something changedbetween then and the implementation of this?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think there was probably a mix ofviews at the time as to how much improvement we would get.MS. SEGER. I probably read some propaganda from somebody.MR. STERNLIGHT. From the very start, CRR meant that we hadto live with ongoing revisions of required reserves as we went througha reserve period. That's been something we have had to cope with.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon what you are interested incontrolling. The rationale for CRR was to get a very [unintelligible]between M1 and reserves. If you are interested in evenness in thefederal funds rate and predictable nonborrowed reserves andpredictable excess reserves, then it's [unintelligible].SPEAKER(?). It is ironic that as soon as the Board approvedCRR, its interest in Ml declined precipitously.MR. ANGELL. So we continue to learn to live with the worstof both worlds.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]12/15-16/86MR. JOHNSON. [Unintelligible.]MS. SEGER. Well, there are some people in banking whoremember when [the reserve requirement] was contemporaneous the firsttime. It has changed and changed again.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] quick control over M1.No more questions on this? We will turn to Messrs. Kichline andTruman, [but first we need to ratify the open market] transactions.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.MS. SEGER. I'll second it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No objections. We will hear precise,careful, thoughtful estimates of the internal and external outlook.MR. KICHLINE. Thank you. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]SPEAKER(?). Ted, one question: Maybe I misunderstood youwhen you spoke of the third-quarter net export number being $151billion. In the Greenbook, I believe--oh, the trade deficit. I begyour pardon.MR. PARRY(?). [Unintelligible.]MR. KICHLINE. Around 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent. So in terms ofwhat we have for 1987, we are essentially growing a half point fasterthan that; given our translation, it is really worth 1/2 point or so.What, indeed, is the trend growth of productivity? The more recentnumbers have been rather disappointing, closer to 1 percent ratherthan what we had thought--1-1/4 percent or even higher. So I think itis an open case at the moment. I don't view this as terribly out ofline with our sense of potential growth in the economy. I suspectthere are folks who have numbers all over the lot. Some outsideforecasts [show unemployment] down to 6-1/2 percent; others have 3percent growth and unemployment rates rising. So there is a good dealof variability.MR. ANGELL. Jim, how much different does productivity lookif you differentiate between the service sector and the goodsproducing sector?MR. KICHLINE. Well, we don't really have good data, as youknow, for well over a year. The evidence that we have suggests thatmanufacturing productivity is probably rising 3-1/2 to 4 percent.Service sector productivity is just really quite poor. So, we aregetting strong productivity gains; that is important in this forecast.In terms of potential growth, we are trying to look at trendproductivity for the economy in total, but there is a great deal ofvariation among sectors.MR. ANGELL. Then it is possible that we really don't measureproductivity in the service sector and don't measure the value ofoutput in the service sector. We just assume productivity is going tobe zero in the service sector, and lo and behold it is.12/15-16/86MR. KICHLINE. No, I think there is a little more informationthan that. Let's say it is open to question but there is a littlemore information than an assumption of zero.MR. PRELL. That wouldn't enter into President Parry'squestion because, as you know, it would affect the GNP growth as well.It wouldn't affect our estimate of the likely effect of the growthnumbers that we have on unemployment.MS. SEGER. Jim, could you supply me with some dollarnumbers? It helps me to think of the real GNP change--to look at thetotal dollar change expected fourth quarter over fourth quarter andthen to look at the specific contributors. Mr. Truman just said thatnet exports are expected to provide about a third. If I am readingyour numbers correctly, the fourth quarter over fourth quarter changein real GNP is expected to be about $102 billion. On the right line,you say about a third of that would be supplied by an improvement innet exports. Where do you--MR. KICHLINE. $28.2 billion is the dollar amount [for netexports]. Ted's one-third is roughly focused on the growth rate ofreal GNP fourth quarter over fourth quarter. We have a growth rate of2.8 percent, and if you take out net exports it is something like 1.8percent.MS. SEGER. Okay. Looking at the $102 billion, where is itgoing to come from?MR. KICHLINE. [Our forecast has]: $60 billion in personalconsumption; $7-1/2 billion in business fixed investment; virtuallynothing in residential construction; nothing, or perhaps a billion ortwo, in business inventories; $28 billion in net exports; and $5billion in government purchases.MS. SEGER. Okay, thank you.MR. BLACK. I think Martha has a good point; you used tosupply dollar figures [in the Greenbook] and then removed them awhileback. Sometimes [unintelligible].MR. KICHLINE. You would like those sort of numbers in thegreen sheets?MR. BLACK. I would and I gather that Martha would. I don'tknow--MS. SEGER. It is hard for some of us who are notmathematical whizzes to take the rates of change and to equate them tospecific numbers.MR. STERN. Jim, I continue to have problems getting a realhandle on the budget outlook. I see in the Greenbook that you have a$180 billion deficit for the current fiscal year. That is very closeto the current CBO baseline, which I guess is $184 billion. I canthink of a number of things that are likely to push that deficit up,starting from the CBO baseline, and not a heck of a lot that arelikely to push it down. So it seems to me that the deficit is likelyto exceed that $180 billion, perhaps considerably. I am having12/15-16/86trouble reconciling that with what you mentioned might be the latestOMB projections.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the latest OMB projection?MR. KICHLINE. The number floating around that is stillpreliminary, I think, is $163 billion for the current fiscal year.That's still subject to change but it's in the $160-$165 billion area.Keep in mind: that is the same number that just a matter of a fewmonths ago was $143 billion; so they have added $20 billion. It's acase of how much you want to up the ante. We have added another $20billion. I think there is a danger of going too far in thatdirection, because there were legislative changes enacted that willbegin to bite. One of the issues relates to defense. We had a lot ofdefense spending in the second and third quarters of last year. It isour sense that the level of that spending is now quite high. We havehad major weapons systems deliveries that are now coming in; they areproducing these things at a very rapid rate. But we don't expectdefense spending to continue to grow in real terms at a fast clip.Rather we expect, as we get into the first part of next year, that wewill probably have constraints on defense spending--in part becauseappropriations were cut back at the Administration's request. I wouldsay that if we are wrong, I would probably add more; that is the safeway to go now. A big question mark is the agricultural area; we havesubstantially more dollars in there than does the Administration. Myexperience over the years is that even when we do that we are alwayslow. It looks sort of outrageous but basically it turns out to be areally important issue. I think it is too pessimistic to say thatthings weren't done. I think they were done. And I think they willbegin to show up as time goes on.MR. JOHNSON. One of the problems with the defense budget isthat when you initially have a defense build-up and add to authority,you build up a lot of authority in the system; then, as you startcutting back that budget authority, the actual outlays start to speedup because you have a lot of backlog in the system. And that can goon for quite some time. It is a strange anomaly: when you areactually cutting budget authority you see outlays increase. But thatcan happen; I know that has happened a few times before.MR. STERN. There was something in the news today about theAdministration requesting some additional defense funds for thecurrent fiscal year as kind of the quid pro quo for a modest increasein 1988. It adds to that--MR. HELLER. You have a nice chart on the effect in theGreenbook. I can't find it right now, but it is kind of startling:the authority goes down and the outlays are going up. I don't knowwhat page it is on, but it really makes the point nicely.MR. PRELL. Page 17.MR. JOHNSON. It really does happen.MR. HELLER. Page 17.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you make of the decline inunemployment insurance claims?12/15-16/86MR. KICHLINE. We had a lot of employment growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not as much as in some earlier months,when unemployment claims didn't do anything, if I remember correctly.MR. KICHLINE. Over the last two months or so, they have beenaveraging about 20,000 to 23,000 per week under what they had beenrunning during the summer. In October-November we did have increasesin manufacturing employment; and that is the circumstance where youoften see the [effect on] initial claims showing up very promptly.The employment growth for those two months is very strong. It hasbeen a reliable leading indicator and I would say it is supportive ofa strengthening labor market. That is what I would make of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You'd make something of it?MR. PRELL. Another facet of the recent data is that thehousehold employment series is not showing gains as strong as thepayroll series. If there were some catch up, as there might well be,we could see the unemployment rate tick down and be more consistentwith this pattern that we have seen in the claims recently.MS. SEGER. How is it handled statistically when these massesof people who are in middle management get pink slips and are given aseverance package or are given psychological treatment for two monthsor something to help them adjust? Do they show up in the unemploymentstatistics immediately or do they have to wait to apply for--MR. KICHLINE. I don't know the answer to that question.MR. PARRY. I think on the payroll survey they wouldn't showup, because many of the companies that do this actually keep them onthe books for maybe a three- or six-month period.MS. SEGER. I see.MR. PARRY. So I don't think they would show up.MR. PRELL. I gather, though, that once they have beensevered, even if they have gotten some payment, you can expect to seethem listed as unemployed and eligible for unemployment insurance.MS. SEGER. Okay. We may be seeing some of that.MR. JOHNSON. I have another question. There is a further 10percent depreciation of the dollar built into the 1987 forecast. Howimportant is it if that does not come about? Or is the lag longenough that it doesn't affect 1987?MR. TRUMAN. That is a very difficult question to answer. Ican really only answer within the context of the way we think aboutthese things. The way we put this together it has quite a significantimpact on the forecast--not on the export side itself, because therethe price lags and the quantity lags are longer and, in some sense, wehave already constrained that forecast to be less ebullient than onewould think would come from the current pace of exchange rate changes.But you get a faster move on the import side; you would get more andmore import growth if things stayed unchanged. And you get a quite12/15-16/86rapid impact on gross investment income from abroad; we still get aconsiderable amount of investment income from abroad and that getstranslated very directly into higher dollar value. In the way we puttogether our deflators and price indexes, you get quite a rapidincrease from a 10 percent depreciation over this period.MR. JOHNSON. On the import side.MR. TRUMAN. On the import side. The bottom line, if Iremember correctly, is that if you kept things at the current levelmaybe about two-thirds of the improvement would go away.MR. ANGELL. Do you have import prices moving up this year by5-1/2 percent?MR. TRUMAN. Actually, we have had it at a little above 5percent.MR. ANGELL. And you have import prices moving up in 1987 at10 percent. Now, let's posit that they would turn out not to be thatstrong. Let's suppose that import prices were to move up next yearmore like they do this year; I presume that means that the real tradedoesn't improve as much.MR. TRUMAN. That's right.MR. ANGELL. Real GNP isn't as favorable, which would alsomean slightly better on the inflation.MR. TRUMAN. I think, on net, things would deteriorate.MR. ANGELL. On balance it deteriorates. If you do that,then in the scenario in which the foreign exchange rates remain aboutconstant, rather than depreciating 10 percent, that together weakensthe entire--MR. TRUMAN. Right. I would emphasize, in answer to GovernorJohnson's question, that there are a number of ways to view this--thathonest men and women get different results from essentially the sameset of initial conditions, including what might or might not be in thepipeline. That is partly just a function of the fact that you have somuch relative price change already. If you thought imports were goingto be much more responsive to the price change you have already had,and you stopped the depreciation where it is, then you are going toget significant improvement on the real side. And you would likelyget an improvement on the nominal side because, essentially, you havehad most of the price change and the quantity change, by hypothesis,coming down a lot. But as I said, to get the $28 billion that Jimmentioned earlier we stabilized things at the fourth-quarter level,and we get, in real terms, about $21 billion. About $12 billion ofthat is on the trade side and $9 billion is on the services side--mostof it from higher real imports.MR. ANGELL. Do you have any interest rate assumptions forthe United States vis-a-vis--MR. TRUMAN. Not built into that scenario.12/15-16/86MR. ANGELL. The interest rate assumptions are built in orare not built in?MR. TRUMAN. In running that kind of experiment, we didn'tchange the--MR. ANGELL. So U.S. interest rates--MR. TRUMAN. They were lower; U.S. interest rates probablyfell. You still earn more--MR. ANGELL. I didn't quite understand you.MR. TRUMAN. The question is: How does the lower interestrate affect our net payments? It affects how much we receive ininterest payments. And [unintelligible] stocks are such that a lowerinterest rate--leaving aside dividends and those kinds of things--[unintelligible] still gives you less net receipts.MR. ANGELL. Are there any corporate profit assumptions thatare explicit in this forecast?MR. TRUMAN. Well, just on the international side, as I said,most of that $9 billion at an annual rate does add up to corporateprofits; it is real. At least in the accounting it is a consequenceof exchange rate changes. Those numbers are very large.MR. KICHLINE. We do the income side of the accounts, aswell, so we have corporate profits. In economic terms they are barelyhigher in 1987 than in 1986; and if you take profits after tax, theyindeed would go down because of the $15 to $20 billion tax increasethat we have built in for the new tax law. So essentially, corporateprofits in an economic sense are little changed next year.MR. HELLER. May I ask you a different question on thedomestic side? The hourly earnings index has been declining verysharply, and there has been a lot of publicity recently given to newentrants into the workforce being paid barely above minimum wage. Isthat improvement in the index entirely due to new low-wage workersentering the workforce? Or is it across the board for existingworkers as well? In other words, is the mix--MR. KICHLINE. The hourly earnings index that we focus onadjusts for inter-industry shifts in employment. So it is not averagehourly earnings as such; the index adjusts for that. As you know, itpopped up in November by about four-tenths; it is volatile from monthto month. Contract construction was up very strongly and there werewage increases as well in finance, insurance, and real estate. Thathas been a hot area--particularly the real estate, where there hasbeen a lot of employment and maybe there has been some bidding up ofwages. But I don't know that we have noticed anything in particularabout rapid growth in the minimum wage area. I would note that otherinformation that we are looking at for contract construction does nottend to support this sense of a very rapid sustained increase inconstruction wages. Did I answer your question?MR. HELLER. Well, actually I wasn't focussing on theNovember numbers. I was looking at the quarterly numbers because the12/15-16/86monthly figures are so volatile. The quarterly figures show asustained downward trend and I was really wondering whether the newentrants are pulling the average down or whether that reflects justlow settlements across the board.MR. KICHLINE. Some of it is lower settlements. We do haveinformation there: the average of settlements in the Bureau ofNational Affairs series, which includes all settlements of 50 or moreworkers, continues to drift lower. One other feature that isinfluencing the labor market data on the wage side, in a major way, isthat many of the agreements provide for bonuses and lump sum paymentsthat do not get cranked into the hourly earnings. That's sort ofstraight time salary. But this bonus feature pops up a great deal andthat may be one thing that--MR. HELLER. That's outside the index?MR. KICHLINE. Yes, the index is straight time hourly pay; ittakes away overtime and all these other things. That particularfeature is captured in compensation measures but not in the hourlyearnings index. And that seems to be spreading.MR. TRUMAN. If I may correct myself, Governor Angell. Anincrease in interest rates would deteriorate the current account.[Unintelligible] on balance that way. Now, on the GNP net exports--because you net out government interest payments--it would go theother way.MR. ANGELL. Ted, thank you.MR. FORRESTAL. Ted, can I go back to what you said beforeabout the exchange rate? Did I hear you say that if the exchange rateremains the same in 1987 that two-thirds of the improvement woulddisappear from the trade balance?MR. TRUMAN. That is the conclusion that we have come to.MR. FORRESTAL. If that were to happen you would then--MR. TRUMAN. This is in the real [balance]. It would be lessthan that amount of deterioration on the imports, on the net currentside, because you don't have the right [unintelligible].MR. FORRESTAL. I am thinking about what that does to theoverall forecast. You said that one-third of the forecast isdependent upon improvement in the trade balance. If you remove two-thirds of that improvement, your forecast is 0.6--MR. PRELL. Well, that is assuming--MR. TRUMAN. In retrospect it would be 0.6 percent.MR. KICHLINE. I think there are other things that happen.You may well have different price behavior, for example, or differentinterest rates that come out of the forecast, or different consumptionspending. Basically, the inclination is not simply to adjust thedomestic forecast down by the full amount because these other thingscould be happening to help shore up--12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Subject to your correction, you have aboutthe lowest price forecast of any of these standard forecasts. Wouldyou explain why I should be so reassured?MR. KICHLINE. Well, Mr. Chairman, [unintelligible] says thatwe are going to get [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] remind us that we've allbeen too high [unintelligible]; next year we are in the clover, itseems.MR. KICHLINE. It depends on what you assume about the oilprice and, as Ted mentioned, we have that drifting up to $16. So thatis clearly different from 1986 but it is not a major problem. Anotherbig issue is what you assume about import prices and how they will bereflected in domestic prices. We think we have something reasonablethere. I don't know how some of these other forecasts track thatthrough. In addition, our sense is that we have at the moment fairlymoderate wage growth, in terms of measured expectations of inflation.You say we are at the low end, but I guess when we talk about numbersthat are four or five percent I would want to be at the low end. Iwouldn't want to be there all the time, but I am perfectly happysitting there in December 1986.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. KICHLINE. Right.MR. JOHNSON. DRI has a somewhat [unintelligible] forecast.I don't know if you know why, but they also have more improvement inthe trade balance than we do.MR. KOHN. They are pretty close to our basis.MR. JOHNSON. It is a similar forecast.MS. SEGER. Isn't DRI the major model that is also concernedabout a recession?MR. PRELL. [Unintelligible.] I think we are lower incompensation than they are but less optimistic about productivitygrowth.MR. PARRY. Ted, you focused on net exports for 1987. Thegrowth that you have for the fourth quarter of 1986 is very large.MR. TRUMAN. Two-thirds of that, or a little more than halfof that, is the oil. About $15 billion of that reflects the change inthe fourth quarter in the volume of oil from the high level. We havedifferent sources of preliminary data for November, too, and we aremore confident about that number than about some of the others.MR. PARRY. It is certainly interesting to note that thegrowth in real terms is $28.6 billion for the fourth quarter of which$27.2 billion--MR. TRUMAN. A lot of it is based upon two assumptions: oneis that the oil imports will behave this way; and the other has to do12/15-16/86with what is or is not picked up in the national income accounts oncounterpart inventory. Such a very little amount was picked up thatwe could find [unintelligible] in the third quarter, assuming that wetreat it symmetrically in the fourth quarter. Much of it is oil; asmall part of it is non-oil imports. And agricultural exports havebeen quite strong. Again, we have both October [data] and some otherinformation on November agricultural exports; it seems[unintelligible] special factors which are not carrying through thatexpansion in the forecast period. But we have had a $4 billion annualrate of increase in ag exports, which largely [reflects] Japanesepurchases, and then some continued improvement on the [non-ag] exportside.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we might call on Mr. Kohn forcomments about Mr. Simpson's paper.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the question we might devote alittle time to--[not] this afternoon but tomorrow morning--in settingthe stage for our next meeting is what targets we want to use, if any.I have been assuming that we would have targets for M2 and M3. Mllooks a lot more doubtful to me. I think we might go some distance inestablishing a framework so that when we come to the next meetingwe'll at least know what targets we are going to have, if any.MR. HELLER. If any? You are required to have them, right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you are right. It is a matter oflaw; we've got to cook up some target. That was a little too[unintelligible]; I don't want to [unintelligible] my view yet.MR. JOHNSON. The broader aggregates we never [miss] thatbadly. As for Ml, a big question mark in my mind is whether we evenwant a target for next year. I would hate to get into the samesituation we got into this year with Ml. That could really constrainthe markets quite a bit at the beginning of the year--if we set atarget assuming another stable pattern of velocity for the year andend up with something [close to this year]. There just seems to betoo much uncertainty about it, period. The study even indicates thatthere is so much uncertainty around Ml that it doesn't seem to haveany great advantage. Maybe if velocity patterns stabilized a littlemore during the year we could re-establish a target at midyear.MR. HELLER. I think it is not only the disinflation impacton M1 but also the very sharp shifts that we get in the componentsright around that borderline of Ml, those between Ml and M2. We getgrowth rates up and down, near 20, 30, or 50 percent sometimes. Andit is right on that borderline; it's very difficult to draw a lineright there. If we want to have an Ml target we might want to look atthe old M1A, or something like that, which apparently has been alittle more stable.MR. JOHNSON. It has done better.MR. HELLER. Maybe somebody from the Research Departmentcould---13-12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. JOHNSON. [Unintelligible.]MR. HELLER. No, I am not going advocate the old M1A. I amjust saying between that and the current M1 it would be the lesserevil.MR. JOHNSON. You mentioned the sensitivity of Ml to a changein interest rates. But what about the spread between NOW accounts andtime deposits?MR. KOHN. Well, when I mentioned interest sensitivity, I wasthinking of something that really encompassed the opportunity cost, sothat would be relative to that time deposit--.MR. JOHNSON. So when you mentioned a percentage pointdecline in interest rates, you meant a compressing of the spread?MR. KOHN. Right. Or a widening.MR. JOHNSON. A decline in the opportunity cost.MS. SEGER. Could you tell us more about the new model thatyou have that does a better job explaining the relationships?MR. KOHN. The most recent version basically encompasses whatwe think is a little better fix on the offering rates--establishingthose in the model. But mostly the reason it gives a betterperformance is that it has been refitted and it has much higherinterest sensitivities and that happens to--MS. SEGER. Just because you added the additional experience.MR. KOHN. We added additional experience and I think themodels are influenced by the most recent experience in some way. Ihave my own concerns that we may have over-reacted econometrically, insome sense, to the most recent data--that some of the shifts thatwe've gotten in M1 are really very substantial shifts in reaction to achange in the state of the world from a high interest rate, highinflation world to a lower interest rate, lower inflation world. Myconcern is that when we look back a couple of years from now, byincorporating that into the interest sensitivity term we may haveoverstated what actually could happen as interest rates fluctuate in acyclical sense in much smaller waves around a lower level. I can onlyemphasize the tremendous uncertainty at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me summarize what I think I heard yousaying. As a central point, if one assumed no change in velocity withunchanged interest rates M1 would go up 5.5 percent. If interestrates then moved up 2 percent we should have about a 14 percentincrease in Ml; in a different environment, if they moved down by 2percent we should have minus 3 percent.MR. KOHN. The other way around. But you are right that a 2percentage point change would imply maybe an 8 percentage pointeffect; I used one percentage point and got a 4 point effect. Now,that is---14-12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You multiplied by 2.MR. KOHN. Right.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But that too is opportunity cost.MR. PARRY. Are you saying that in the estimation theinterest rate elasticity may be somewhat higher than is really thecase--that it may be more of a one-time shift?MR. KOHN. I have that suspicion. Obviously, I can't showit. It is true that the newer models with the higher elasticities dopretty well this year; they show about a 12 percent growth. Sothey've got that on their side. I just have the suspicion that insome sense we may have overreacted. But I think that M1 is going tobe very interest sensitive, very sensitive to opportunity costs--inpart because, as Governor Heller was saying, it is closelysubstitutable for other kinds of short-run liquid deposits and insureddeposits. And as those things shift then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you say a one percent change ininterest rates, you are talking about a one percentage--MR. KOHN. One percentage point change in interest rates. Inmy own calculation I was using the funds rate.MR. JOHNSON. I thought you said--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Absolute change. All you are talkingabout is a change in the funds rate from 5 percent to 6 percent orfrom 5 percent to whatever.MR. JOHNSON. I thought you said there was some opportunitycost --CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] the opportunity cost isbetween--MR. KOHN. That implied that there was some adjustment by theinstitutions, but a slow adjustment. That is, this was taken from thetable in the last part of the paper that referred to a slow adjustmentof the offering rates. It didn't imply that offering rates didn'tchange--only that they changed slowly as they have this year. So itis not necessarily a one percentage point change from opportunitycost; it would be something less than that. It would be, say, a onepercentage point change in market interest rates on January 1st andthen a very slow adjustment of offering rates to that.MR. ANGELL. You assume this interest rate sensitivity worksboth ways on the same demand function?MR. KOHN. The way we have it now, it would. But for largechanges, I am not certain.MR. ANGELL. [Unintelligible.]MR. PRELL. The symmetry of the response of the banks to thisis a further complication.-15-12/15-16/86MR. ANGELL. If it did have symmetry, that would mean that ifwe were ever to get back into a higher inflation scenario and the needfor higher interest rates one might argue that the correct path for Mlmight be zero. This thing works both ways.MR. KOHN. It's not likely to be symmetrical from the currentlevels since offering rates are above where they need to be anyhow.If you raised interest rates from the current level, presumably you'dshort cut a certain adjustment that otherwise would be happening. Soit is a more complicated kind of thing. But if you started from anequilibrium relationship of offering rates--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the market rate that you use changes byone percentage point, what is the elasticity of M2 and M3?MR. KOHN. I don't have an M3 elasticity, but M2 with a slowadjustment would be .09 elasticity. So .09 times about 16 percentwould be about a 1-1/2 percentage point change in M2. The elasticitywith respect to Ml--this is over a year--was .23.MR. BLACK. Don, in expressing doubts about the new model,are you explicitly assuming that you will have more rapid adjustmenton the offering rates?MR. KOHN. Well, that is another thing that could happenhere. It could be, particularly if interest rates moved down, thatthe cost pressure on banks would be so large that the competitive damwould break and you could get offering rates moving much more promptlythan that--MR. BLACK. You are seeing some movement--MR. KOHN. You would have smaller elasticities but they wouldstill be large.MR. ANGELL. It would be relatively [more] comfortable thanliving within an M1 pattern for 1987 of between 2 percent and, say, 16percent.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think that we have come a longway on this subject in the last [few years]. A few years ago, we weresitting around here talking about M1 as if it were synonymous withtransactions balances. I should hope that that concept may beseriously damaged. And we were talking, either directly orindirectly, about the causal relationship between the rate of changein transactions balances and the rate of change in nominal GNP. Asyou know, [I have been] arguing that we can't measure money anymoreand that we really should start to think in terms of gearing policy tothe rate of change in liquidity. In that connection, I think oneindicator that we might want to use--if you think there is safety innumbers and in the past that has proven to be the case--is totalliquid assets, if you can displace Ml. I would certainly stronglyurge that we use total liquid assets if we want a third [target].Last year its behavior relative to the nominal GNP was less defectivethan any of the other indicators. It wasn't too great, but it wasless defective.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]12/15-16/86MR. MORRIS. Well, there was one year when it was[unintelligible] but so did all the others--everything did well--andthat was 1982. Since 1982 its velocity has been less than tranquil, Isee, but the deviation as compared to M1 trend velocity is very small.I am not saying that any of these is anything that we should tie our[unintelligible] to in any rigid way. What we have learned is thatnone of these monetary aggregates has an extremely stable relationshipto nominal GNP. But the fact is that in four out of the last fiveyears we have not met our initial M1 target, and I think that issomething we ought to pay a little attention to. Despite thedeviation of the relatively broader aggregates from trend velocity, wegenerally have been hitting the [targets for] the broader aggregates.We have had ranges wide enough to encompass them. And we have donethat this year. If we are forced to go with these, and under currentlaw we are, then I think it makes sense to go with--I wouldn't callthem targets--but indicators of monetary policy that we are morelikely to hit. And I think the situation with M1 now is such that M1velocity is completely unpredictable. We need to forecast Mlvelocity, as Mr. Kohn's paper indicates. But first we need to knowwhat is likely to happen to interest rates, what the relationshipbetween nominal GNP and interest rates is, and also how the bankersare going to respond to any change in interest rates. And it seems tome that all that adds up to the proposition that the current M1velocity is not predictable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we had a situation where interestrates were rising, say, one percent or more and M1 was rising at thesame time, say, at least faster than the nominal GNP. Does that tellyou anything?MR. ANGELL. Yes, it certainly does. It seems to me thatFrank wants to throw away too much. During a period of acceleratinginflation, from even very low levels, it seems to me it's the casethat there is still a rather stable relationship. There may be astable relationship during periods of disinflation, but we may not bewilling to admit to what that is. That is, we may not be willing toadmit to the negative velocity that would entail. What I think weknow is that when you shift from an inflating [unintelligible] economyto one of disinflation and outright deflation, then thoserelationships are unstable. And I think that every such period inhistory would demonstrate that to be the case.MR. MORRIS. I am just saying that I have no objections tousing M1 for whatever information you think it may be giving you.What I do object to is using it as a published target of monetarypolicy when the uncertainties are so enormous.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that point. I think Wayne hasmade a good point too. You can visualize times when this relationshipgives you a lot more accurate assessment of nominal GNP, and I can seea time when more stability would return to Ml. When you have bigshifts, as you say, from a high inflation, high interest rate economyto low inflation and low interest rates, you expect big changes andunstable conditions. I wouldn't want to throw M1 out altogether; butI certainly feel uncomfortable publishing a target range for 1987 inthe middle of a transition period like this. And giving people theimpression that we are going to make some attempt to hit that targetreally bothers me.12/15-16/86MR. ANGELL. Maybe we should call it a monitoring range.MR. MORRIS. Even if you do that the New York Times is goingto publish a picture of it every Friday showing M1 way [outside]--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What [velocity] increase do you get with,say--just to keep the arithmetic easy--a 6 percent increase in nominalGNP and no change in the discount rate?MR. KOHN. For next year we would have, because of some ofthe lagged effects of the declines in interest rates--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose there are no lagged effects ininterest rates.MR. KOHN. Then I would say we'd get about a 5 percentincrease in M1 and I would expect about a one percent trend increasein velocity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You still have a trend?MR. KOHN. A little one; between zero and one, backing off alittle. I think there could be some trend from having demand depositsand currency in there. It is not all NOW accounts that might have atrend growth of about zero, the way M2 did. So I can't rule out thatthere would be some trend in there.MR. STERN. That would imply very slow growth over the lastthree quarters of next year given the first quarter.MR. KOHN. No. I didn't think that was a projection for nextyear but rather if we were in equilibrium. For next year we wouldhave much faster growth for the year given that we have lagged effectsfrom this year.MR. ANGELL. What kind of velocity would you have if you hada 5 percent nominal GNP and a 100 basis point decline in interestrates?MR. KOHN. I guess I would have about a minus 3 percent,using my 4 percent minus the one.MR. ANGELL. So that would mean an 8 percent--MR. KOHN. This is not for next year; this is starting outfrom the position--MR. MORRIS. What if the banks continued to pay the currentrate when the market rates really went down by one percentage point?Then Ml would balloon.MR. KOHN. That is right. Now, my calculation assumes evenwith a 4 percent reaction, which is a huge reaction to a onepercentage point change in interest rates, at least some slowadjustment of those offering rates. I don't know what--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get interest rates back up to 21percent again; you won't have any money supply at all.12/15-16/86VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's the question I want to ask.I am not sure about that. Within the framework of this revised modelthat you are working with Don, is it plausible--this is not,obviously, an operative question for 1987--that you could get apattern of pricing behavior by banks that would produce a real creditcrunch in the old fashioned sense of the word? Is it plausible to getpricing by banks that becomes so aggressive that you are not even sureof the algebraic signs?MR. KOHN. I guess by credit crunch you mean a situation inwhich interest rates are rising. They could raise their rates on NOWaccounts by even more because of the concern about lowering--. Isuppose M1 could swallow M2 at some point here but that sounds ratherextreme.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It depends on what kind of marketthey want to--MR. ANGELL. I don't see how the crunch can occur, Jerry,without [interest rate] ceilings. Deregulation shouldn't mean thatyou are going to price so that the quantity demanded--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I realize this is a highlyimplausible circumstance, but in that circumstance if the banks decidethat what they really have to do to protect themselves, or to keepaway from hot money positions themselves, is not just maintain theirdeposit base but increase their "stable deposit base" they could getvery aggressive in pricing retail deposits in a crunch typeenvironment.MR. ANGELL. Well, then they have negative margins, don'tthey?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to say that retail deposits aremore volatile than--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it says that they are notmore volatile, but that in order to keep them the competitivepressures get so intense that banks have to respond by pricing thosedeposits more aggressively.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is hard for me to see the situation inwhich they would price those deposits more aggressively than themarginal deposits. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. As I recall our discussion about Ml in July,after lengthy discussion, I think we came to the conclusion that itwould be best to show a range for M1 and that we would stick with thecurrent range and note all the uncertainties associated with it. In1986 we have had very sharp declines in interest rates. We are nowexpecting, at least on the basis of the general discussion, thatinterest rates are going to be flat. So it seems to me that one couldrepeat what we set out as a tentative target and feel a little betterabout it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The argument on the other side--just toput forth the argument--is that if it is going to be so volatile in-19-12/15-16/86either direction, with relatively modest changes in interest rates,does that serve us well?MR. MELZER. One thing that struck me in reading this paperis that the advantage of a narrow aggregate is that we can influenceit. When you get out to M2 and M3, our ability to influence issomewhat limited. Just from an operational point of view it isdesirable, at least the way I see things, to have something there thatwe can influence should we choose to do so. The other thing thatstruck me is that the NOW account aspects of Ml are really going tocause ongoing problems in that regard. There may come a time when wewant to go to some more strictly transactional base, whether it is M1Aor some other type of narrow aggregate. This isn't the time, I don'tthink, to lay a new narrow aggregate on the table because there arestill a lot of uncertainties. But I do have this feeling that it is adesirable thing, if we want to choose a regime around a narrowaggregate, that we could control it--that we have the concept of thatintact in some way, in terms of how we set targets.MR. MORRIS. May I object to that argument? We cannotcontrol M1 unless we do not have an interest rate policy. In otherwords, if we want to have a strict monetarist regime and decide we aregoing to produce X amount of Ml, we can do that, but we have tosurrender any influence over interest rates. You really are going tohave to add that to your operational--MR. ANGELL. That is always the case.MR. MORRIS. What's always the case?MR. ANGELL. If you want to focus strictly on Ml, you havegot to give up interest rates.MR. MORRIS. I would argue that we are never going to give upsome kind of interest rate policy. Nor should we. And, therefore,the idea that M1 is controllable has no merit whatsoever.MR. BOEHNE. There is a value to the monetary aggregates thatgoes beyond the control issue and that is their value as an indicatorvariable. We can use interest rates to control nominal GNP but one ofthe problems is we don't know what nominal GNP is except with aconsiderable lag. Something like M2 can give us information aboutwhat is going on in the economy, in an indicator sense, even though wedon't control it. And it seems to me that there is some value inhaving an indicator variable that has a lag that is shorter thannominal GNP. If you look at M2, it has not been all that bad eventhough we have had a drop in velocity this year. If we had used M2,for example, and had followed it more as an indicator value, it wouldhave signalled the need for lower interest rates during the first partof the year, sooner than in fact we did lower them. And if you lookat it now, what it is signalling is that we don't need furtherreductions in short-term rates at the moment. You have to look at anindicator variable in the context of a whole lot of other things. ButI think one could have a framework for arguing the value, in anindicator sense, of the broader aggregates--both M2 and M3--that isquite separate from this control business.12/15-16/86MR. JOHNSON. I can conceive of a time when Ml would be[unintelligible]. I don't want ever to get in a situation like this,but 1979 was a very convenient time for an Ml target. It is adisguise, maybe, for a high interest rate policy; but it certainlyavoids a lot of the politics of having to--MR. MORRIS. The broader aggregates would do the same thing.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I don't know. If I remember right, M2was right on the target.MR. HELLER. You could go the other way. If you go on thecontrol issue raised by Mr. Melzer, what is wrong with going to themonetary base? Then you have something that is really under ourcontrol, and it probably has been performing better than the currentM1 at least.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Damning with faint praise!MR. ANGELL. [Unintelligible.]MR. JOHNSON. There is something to at least having ameasured narrow aggregate that we can influence, if we can. But Ithink the point is still this: I don't see that the uncertaintiesaround Ml or the base are any more improved than they were when westarted out last year. I realize that we didn't forecast the declinein interest rates that we got last year. I am just saying--MR. HELLER. What about the base? You don't get that kind ofshifting that you get around the artificial line drawn on M1 and [inresponse to] what you call financial deregulation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get that kind of shifting; it is justonce removed.MR. JOHNSON. That is right. The magnitude is not as great,but it is there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With shifting into NOW accounts, as Irecall, you get a higher reserve requirement relative to the base, allother things equal.MR. JOHNSON. Definitely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't have to accommodate it but--MR. JOHNSON. Who is to say, Bob, that we won't get a shockwith energy prices or something. What if OPEC--? We could get a bigsurge in interest rates and we would end up looking vicious on M1 andneed to go, as you say, even temporarily to negative rates of growth.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that there are several ways wecould go here. But one thing I feel is very important is for themarket to understand that if inflation were to reemerge as a threat wewould move quickly to a monetary aggregate targeting--we would makethat our primary responsibility. I don't know whether we have it outthere--12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have anything burning tosay? At this stage I just want to give you a little homework. I waslistening to this and I think we ought not come to any obviously finaljudgments; but it would be very helpful if we had a good sense of theframework in which we should approach the necessary numerology,recognizing that we can't get away from that. Is there any sympathyfor a new narrower aggregate?MR. BLACK. Yes, I have some Mr. Chairman, which I will talkabout tomorrow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there any sympathy for any newaggregate at all? Responses in the morning. I even want a consensusin the morning, as nearly as we can get one. Do we want to have anormal type target for Ml at all? And I would have a sub-question tothat, which may be quite important. In the absence of a normaltarget--which says to me that we have a target of X to Y and if we'reoutside it, we're outside it--is there anything that we would want tosay about movements of M1 in relation to other things, such as thingsthat would alarm us or reassure us? And finally, the question is: Dowe retain M2 and M3? If we answer all those questions with a "no" wedon't have any targets. So you have one constraint on your remarkstomorrow: you can't answer no to all the questions.[Meeting recessed]12/15-16/86December 16, 1986--Morning SessionMR. BLACK. Did you ask if anybody wanted to comment, Mr.Chairman? At the appropriate time, I would like to.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The appropriate time is [now].MR. BLACK. I don't see much point in setting a range for Mlbecause it has been misbehaving so badly. We could simply omit therange but I think it would be worthwhile if we substituted a range forM1A. I know there are problems with trying to target M1A, just likethere are problems with any of the other aggregates; but the long-runinterest elasticity of M1A reported in the staff paper is low enoughto make it, I think, technically feasible to set a range of 4 to 5percentage points [in width], which is what we have done customarily.It seems to me likely that the interest elasticity of M1A will remainrelatively stable even if the depository institutions began to adjusttheir deposit rates more flexibly in response to changes in marketrates. And I just think that some sort of discipline like that couldbe very useful in reminding the public that we are serious aboutinflation. Also, if we get to the point that we need to tighten up,we are going to need something to [unintelligible]. Remembering backto October 6, 1979, I think a lot of people voted for targeting theaggregates because they thought it provided an excuse to raiseinterest rates more than they otherwise could get away with; and Ithink this kind of aggregate target could be extremely useful in thatcapacity when that time comes, if it ever comes. I would do thisalong with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's in large part ex post rationale. Doyou have any studies of the elasticity of M1A as opposed to Ml, Mr.Kohn?MR. KOHN. Yes, we do, Mr. Chairman. I think there is someinformation in the back of the paper--table 3 in Mr. Simpson's memo.You can see that M1A elasticity over a one-year period is roughlycomparable to that of M2.MR. BLACK. The last paragraph on page 15 is a good one toread on that. For me, it's easier to interpret that sort of thingthan to look at the elasticity tables. It says that a 50 basis pointchange in market interest rates would alter M1A growth and itsvelocity by less than 1/4 of a percentage point at an annual rate inthe short run and about 1/2 of a percentage point over the year--notperfect, but not bad by the standards of the other possibilities, Ithink.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any confidence, assuming thatone was going to have a target for M1A, about where it should be?MR. BLACK. I was going to ask Mr. Kohn what he thinks itought to be.MR. KOHN. I didn't really think about a target range, Mr.Chairman, but I would say in terms of our experience with M1A over thelast year or two that we have found it not nearly as bad as Ml as apredictor of GNP. It is better, but not that much better. Theproblem here is that demand deposits have been growing even faster-23-12/15-16/86than we would have predicted on the basis of past experience. We havehad about a 9-1/2 percent increase in M1A this year and I think on thebasis of past experience we would have predicted something more on theorder of 6 percent. So we have added, in some sense, an overshoot inour demand deposit growth relative to the growth [unintelligible]. Aswe look at this phenomenon, we see that the current interestelasticity of demand deposits seems to be increasing year by year.Now, I think there are a couple of possibilities here. One is that tothe extent that demand deposits had a large block of sort of "excessdeposits" in them before businesses began to manage them moreefficiently that helped to hold down the elasticity. As cashmanagement has spread into medium and smaller sized businesses, thoseexcess demand deposits are more and more typically out of the demanddeposits and are being held as compensating balances for cashmanagement and other services.MR. MORRIS. Do you know if the additional growth is almostentirely in business accounts?MR. KOHN. Well, yes it would have to be. In our ownershipsurvey, household accounts were about 1/4--I think 26 percent--ofdemand deposits, and that proportion hasn't changed very much. So bydefinition it is primarily businesses that account for the growth.But, returning to the original point, M1A has been better than M1.MR. ANGELL. It also has another feature and that is that itis somewhat more controllable in regard to altering its opportunitycosts, I would presume. Do your studies show that to be the case?MR. KOHN. Well, the market rate is the opportunity cost, theway we look at it, because there isn't an explicit offering rate ondemand deposits. So it's true, as I think President Black said, thatit is not subject to some of the uncertainties that we would see forM1 associated with how depository institutions are going to pricetheir NOW accounts; I think that greatly adds to the uncertainty.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably submerged under this is howdepository institutions price their services.MR. KOHN. To the extent that there are switches betweencompensating balances and fees, that would affect M1A as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What interest credit do [they] give?MR. JOHNSON. It's hard to say that demand deposits have beenless volatile in this whole mess than OCDs. Isn't that right?MR. KOHN. I'm sorry?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Intellectually, I presume that if you wantto go this way, the excuse would be that we have had all of the shiftfrom demand deposits into NOW accounts that we are going to get andthey are less substitutable at the margin for other types of liquidfunds.MR. MELZER. That's what would trouble me. As I saidyesterday, I think it's desirable to have a narrow aggregate, but itwould trouble me to roll another one out right now when there is still12/15-16/86this uncertainty in general about the behavior of velocity. Thatcould not only discredit that aggregate but also could raise questionsabout what we are doing because, when we roll the new one out, we areimplying a higher confidence level in that aggregate and in aggregatestargeting in general.MR. JOHNSON. I think that's a good point. It looks like weare really starting to get desperate--fishing around for something.MR. HELLER. That may give you the perfect excuse in a way.You may want to say at the beginning of the year that you are studyingthe possibility of reintroducing narrow monetary aggregates and at thepresent time you are conducting studies to determine if M1A, orsomething along those lines, might be appropriate. If so, at a latermoment in the year you may want to set new targets. Therefore, it'sclear that you want to go back to targets but you avoid having to seta target at the beginning of the year that you will clearly overshoot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. MIA has somewhat peculiar characteristicsto me. It says we are very interested in business demand deposits andcurrency but we don't care what transactions balances individuals holdper se.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have a more radical idea.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me recognize Mrs. Horn first.MS. HORN. Well, I agree with many people who think that thisis not the time to set an M1 target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are only talking now about what we aregoing to do regarding a [new] narrow--MS. HORN. Oh, sorry. That's not what I am talking about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will rapidly get to the [Ml] question.MR. BLACK. I didn't mean to overstate the case about M1Abecause I don't think it's going to be all that good; I don't thinkanything is going to be all that good. What I would really like tosee us consider is setting inflation targets for the next three yearsor so. I don't have in mind that we would set up any kind ofautomatic operational procedure that would cause us to in any kind ofpredetermined way do something if we deviate from this target. All Iam recommending is that we set forth an explicit objective. I thinkthat would have more than a cosmetic effect because, first of all, itwould help preserve our credibility in the sense that the public wouldknow that we were going to have to take some kind of action to try toget inflation in line if we saw signs that we were deviating from thetarget. The second reason I mentioned a while ago--that it is awfullynice when the time comes that we have to take the unpopular step oftightening to have something that we can point to other than interestrates. If the aggregates are weak, we don't have a lot to point toand something of this sort could give us some political insulation ata time when we need it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will return to the question a littlelater. Mr. Stern, do you have something [to say] about the new Ml?12/15-16/86MR. STERN. I was going to say that, from a strategic pointof view, I thought Governor Heller's suggestion was a good one--particularly because I think we ought to take another look at themonetary base as a narrow target. We have some evidence that suggeststhat, at least in recent years, its basic relationship to things likeinterest rates and inflation and output has been more stable than thatof the other aggregates. While I am not prepared at the moment to saythat the evidence is sufficiently convincing to me that I would wantto push it, I do think it's worth some further investigation. Andthat would fit in rather nicely, it seems to me, with the kind ofapproach Governor Heller was suggesting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't detect any strong enthusiasm forintroducing a new narrow monetary aggregate as an actual target atthis point.MR. JOHNSON. I would be in favor of continuing to study itif we can, as Governor Heller said. Maybe at midyear if we felt morecomfortable with a narrower target we might look at it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's return to that. The next question Ihave is: Do we want any new aggregate at all? I think Mr. Morrisproposed one.MR. MORRIS. My proposition was that L would be a suitableswap for M1 but only if we wanted to stay with three targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you push this with enthusiasm or withjust a feeling that if people want to try that we--MR. MORRIS. My thinking is that it is probably a bettermeasure of liquidity than M2 or M3. If I had to choose only one ofthe three I think I would take L.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. L suffers from the grievous defect thatthe figures come in months late.MR. MORRIS. But they don't have to. If we wanted an earlyestimate we could get it, I am sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would the staff like to comment on L?MR. KOHN. A couple of levels of comments: one is that--returning again to the results we get in looking at L relative to theother aggregates--it looks better in terms of St. Louis type reduced-form regression estimates than the narrow aggregates but about thesame as M2 and M3 in predicting GNP. Before we decide really to pay alot of attention to L, I would like to take a close look at some ofthe data problems. It is supposed to include Treasury securitiesunder one year that are in the hands of the public, outside thebanking system. We don't know quite how many Treasury securitiesunder one year are in the hands of the banking system because theTreasury used to run a survey on that and they don't anymore. Itdoesn't include agency securities, for example, because we are notsure how many agency securities are out there [in the hands of thepublic], although it does include commercial paper. It has some verypeculiar things; I think it has a lot of data problems. We probablycould work around some of them, but my temptation would be to work on12/15-16/86those data problems and also on getting more timely information beforewe get serious about L.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have any views on L orany other broad aggregate?MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, maybe what we should do is setthe M2 and M3 targets in conformity with the Humphrey-Hawkins Act andhave staff study a menu of possible aggregates--M1A, L, and whateverelse people think might be appropriate--and try to deal with thatlater in 1987.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments? I do not detect anystrong urge for adopting L as of--MS. SEGER. We ought to go back to targeting interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Too radical! Let me just take myquestions out of order. Does everybody agree with what seems to bethe implicit assumption of some people that we will have an M2 and M3target in the traditional form?MR. BLACK. Since we can't accept anything else, I would beafraid to throw those out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we have that assumption on M2 andM3. So the other question is what we do with Ml. I think there is aquestion, clearly, as to whether we should have an M1 target, statedas either a target or monitoring range, in the form in which we havehad but didn't initially [adopt in July]. Do we want to say anythingabout Ml? We can obviously say some things that have been suggestedabout looking at various alternatives and studying these things.MR. BOEHNE. I don't think we can have Ml as a normal target.I think that is fairly clear and obvious, given all the problems. ButI do think there are some advantages to keeping it as a monitoringrange, for the simple reason that it may be useful to us sometime inthe future under a different set of circumstances than we have now.It also has the advantage of some history, so we aren't rolling outsomething new. We can say that it once worked; it's not working now,but it may work in the future. And I would couch it in terms of: Hereis a range; we don't have a whole lot of confidence that we can hit itbut we want to keep it on the shelf so that we can use it; it wouldonly be used in the context of a whole lot of other information, sodon't think that a deviation from the target in and of itself meansthat we are going to change policy; it's in a state that we are goingto look at it and we may bring it back to play a more useful role.So, I am for a monitoring range with some kind of numerical values tothat range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I would be in favor of continuing to follow Mland certainly reporting on it, but I would be a little reluctant tore-establish the range at this point because the results are going tovary, probably, from whatever we target. And as we go through theyear, if the relationships tend to re-emerge and/or if GNP growth orinflation growth were to begin to move away on the high side, then at-27-12/15-16/86that point I would re-establish the range to use it effectively. ButI'd establish a range that seems appropriate at that time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I would join those who would opt to maintain M1as an aggregate and also to set a monitoring range. To be sure, I'dadopt language not unlike what we have done in most recent times--thatis, that we will pay attention to it, but only in relationship to M2,M3, and other developments--and as a result keep it in front of thepublic for purposes of going back to it sometime in the future, whichI'm convinced we will have to do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I would agree with Si Keehn. That is to say,I would keep M1 for its informational value and because we might needit in the future. I wouldn't want to set a range for it because Ithink it's getting a little embarrassing and boring trying to explainwhy we keep missing it. Moreover, the market seems--and as far as Ican tell the Congress seems--fairly comfortable with our stance on Ml;so I don't think we have a lot to lose by keeping it [for itsinformational value] and just dropping the range entirely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The idea that I am fooling with is avariation on several themes here. First of all, I do want to keep M1in the ball game, even if it is on the bench, partly because when Ilook at the behavior of M2 and M3 it seems that they basically growwithin a 6 to 9 percent range, regardless of what's going on in theeconomy, inflation, interest rates, or anything else. There's acertain amount of comfort that you can draw from that, in that youhave a good chance of hitting the targets but not much comfort interms of what hitting the targets may mean. The thought I had wouldbe to keep the M2 target, and presentationally--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The M2 target?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Keep M2, M3, and maybe a monitoringrange for debt like we have had in the past. Presentationally, what Ihad in mind is that they would be prominently displayed in the boxthat is always part of the testimony. Also in that box in a prominentplace we could have a brief paragraph that would say something like"While the Committee has not adopted a formal target for M1 for 1987,it will continue to monitor its behavior closely. Consistent withthat, the Committee expects that in the context of GNP growth of, say,6 percent and relatively stable interest rates, Ml growth should be ina range of 4 to 8 percent." And then add something along these lines:"However, in the unlikely event that income is growing rapidly andvelocity is increasing the Committee might be prepared to re-establisha target [for Ml]." You could maybe combine that idea with GovernorHeller's suggestion and broaden it to say something to the effect thatin the intervening period the Committee is restudying theserelationships and definitions and so on. Some notion like that hassome appeal to me, both presentationally and substantively, even if itdoes mean that Ml in some sense is on the bench rather than in theball game.12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. I basically agree with what Jerry said. It seemsto me that having Ml still play a role--and with a range--makes somesense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure you are agreeing with him.Maybe you can be more explicit. I am not sure whether you are or youaren't.MR. PARRY. Well, he stated a range. He even stated aspecific range for Ml, but a monitoring range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That seems to be somewhat different.Perhaps it's more nuances--. If I understood Mr. Corrigan, he saiddon't present a range even as a monitoring range; present one as afootnote under certain assumptions.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's a little more than a footnote.I'd have it in a prominent place in that box that is always the focalpoint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a little difficulty visualizingyour paragraph as part of a box.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I added in close physical proximityto the part that lays out the quantitative targets for M2 and M3.MR. HELLER. An off-balance-sheet item.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. An off-balance-sheet item.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. That is an interesting possibility, but myviews are even more basic. I would simply explain the problems wehave had with M1 and then say that, given those problems and theuncertainties that still lie ahead on M1, we are undertaking a studyon narrow aggregates in general but that under the circumstances nowwe are only publishing an M2 and M3 target. Perhaps at midyear whenwe have had more evidence on whether velocity has stabilized for someof these narrower aggregates, we would have a chance to choose one ofthem--and maybe Ml is the one again--and we might publish a new targetrange. I don't see that it serves us any good purpose to have a rangeat all for the first six months of the year. As a matter of fact, ifwe published a range, I think we would all feel uncomfortable sayingthat we ought to have a range that includes 12 or 13 percent growthfor Ml, even though that has been the experience [because] ofvelocity; I think we would be constrained to want to say somethinglike 5 to 8 percent or 6 to 9 percent. And then we would run into thesame potential problems, it seems to me, of running above the targetsinitially in the year and having the markets ask: What's the Fed goingto do about Ml? Even if they don't believe we will do much, it couldbe a matter of weeks that they are uncertain about it. It couldaffect the markets in a way that I don't think we would really want.So, I would be in favor of announcing that we still think there is animportant function for a narrow aggregate but we are going to studythe issue; it could be that M1A or some other narrow measure responds12/15-16/86better than Ml. And we could also get a better feel for velocitylater. But I am for going with an M2 and M3 target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. Unfortunately, my view is the same as it was lastJuly--which was that we should not publish an M1 target range becausethe aggregate was behaving so weirdly. I felt that it would--and as amatter of fact it did--confuse the financial markets and marketparticipants, regardless of how many qualifications we put out with itand despite our saying that we were not paying as much attention to itas we used to. As long as it can be graphically presented everyFriday by The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times, people willpay attention to it. Those footnotes don't get transmitted becausenewspapers don't transmit everything and the readers don't want all ofthat baggage. They are looking for easy answers. So I would go alongwith Governor Johnson's view that it's best not to establish a rangefor it now but to indicate that we are doing a thorough study of thisand looking for some sort of narrow aggregate. I would publish an M2and M3 range.MR. JOHNSON. An afterthought on what I said is one thing onthe other side too. If we were to establish something like a 5 to 8percent or a 6 to 9 percent monitoring range, and if we did have anupsurge or sudden increase in velocity, it could really be just asappropriate to be thinking of 2 or 3 percent money growth. We wouldbe just as constrained by the minimum on that range as the upper side.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What I am talking about does notcontemplate a range in that sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's come back to that. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, if I read Mr. Corrigan and some ofthe others who have spoken up for a monitoring range correctly, itreflects a feeling that at some point in time we may face another 1979situation and that at that point we will be able to resurrect M1 againand pursue a more restrictive policy than we otherwise would have beenable to do because of the mystique attached to Ml. I think that's nota very realistic proposition. I think Ml did have that kind ofmystique in 1979 but it certainly doesn't have it now. If we go tothe Congress and say we can't have M1 growing more than 9 percent,they are going to say: Well, you let it grow at 15 percent in 1986 andin 4 out of 5 years in the 1980s you didn't meet your target andnothing happened. Why do you think you have to meet an M1 target thisyear? I don't think you can put M1 back in the box and pull it outthat easily anymore.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't want a range, I take it.MR. MORRIS. No sir.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Ml is not going to go away. We are not going tokeep a chart out of The Wall Street Journal or The New York Times. Ipresume we are going to continue to release weekly figures, four-weekaverages, so it's there. I think too much attention has been given to-30-12/15-16/86it. I prefer that we keep it as a monitoring range. I would prefernot to change it; to tinker with the numbers is like tinkering withM1A. We are not going to tinker with the numbers and have them belarge enough that we have a chance of being within them. So, I wouldlike to have a monitoring range, a historic range that we have beenusing, and simply indicate to the market that there may come a timewhen M1's velocity will return to this more historic relationship.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. That is essentially where I would be. I wouldset a range and then put language around it like we did in Julyindicating that we wouldn't necessarily expect to hit it. Inconnection with that, that's where we could bring in Governor Heller'spoint that because of the interest elasticity of Ml, we are looking atother narrower aggregates that would have less elasticity. I don'tthink we have lost a lot of credibility by having the range and thennot meeting it. My own view is that it doesn't create a lot confusionin the marketplace as to what we are doing. I think when the marketgets worried about rapid M1 growth, it may well be against thebackdrop of other developments like, say, a weak dollar, a steeperyield curve, and so forth. They're not making judgments about rapidM1 growth solely based on what our range is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. My preference would be to go without a range forMl, basically for some of the reasons already mentioned--that we thinkthe relationships between M1 and the other economic variables wereally care about have broken down or at least we don't understandthem very well. To set a range in that context, it seems to me, isdifficult and hard to justify. I certainly would not be uncomfortablewith some language to the effect that we are going to continue towatch what happens with M1 and evaluate it along with a variety ofother incoming information. As a kind of fallback position, it seemsto me that if we are going to set some sort of range it ought to besomewhat more realistic than the ranges we have been adopting, simplybecause I don't think we are achieving very much by specifying rangesthat our best estimates suggest are going to be too low.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I agree pretty much with what Tom Melzer hasjust said. I would set a range and I would try to explain it. Itseems to me that whatever credibility we had on Ml we have lost. Themarkets have adjusted to that loss of credibility. They seem to beaccepting the fact that we don't know. If we come up with somethingelse, it would be an implication that we know what we are doing. Ifwe lose on that, we double our credibility loss. I would rather ridewith what we have for a while and, obviously, be looking for betterways. But I guess I have not heard anything proposed that gives me alot of confidence that it would be any better than what we have beendoing over the last several months.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I am with those who think we shouldnot set a target range for Ml but I suppose, in the end, a monitoringrange is a possibility. The words that we associate with what we dowith M1--and for that matter with monetary targeting in general--I12/15-16/86think are very important. And I would like to see some words thatmaybe go back a bit to Bob Black's point about the targeting ofinflation, or just some words that say monetary targeting is not anobjective of the Federal Reserve System--that whether it's Ml, M2 orM3, we are not expecting to control the aggregates, but we are settingranges that we think are consistent with such and such a pattern ofprices, employment, and total spending. I would indicate that,basically, we began setting target ranges publicly and inCongressional testimony as a way of assuring the Congress and thepublic that we were in fact intent on getting to a certain point withinflation, and that at the moment the connection between monetarytargets and inflation is not what it used to be, and that we aretalking here about what monetary targets we think are consistent withour ultimate objective.MR. BOEHNE. May I make a comment on the suggestions forstudies? If Don Kohn checks his files, I think he will find a wholestack of studies that we have done on this particular topic. I thinkour words ought to be couched in terms of "we will continue to studythis subject on an ongoing basis" rather than make a reference to anew major study that we hope will somehow enable us to find the truth,because six months or a year from now, when the results of this studycome out, I think they may be somewhat disappointing. I just don'tthink we want to set ourselves up for that.MR. JOHNSON. Well, we can always say we studied it anddidn't find anything.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you express yourself explicitly onthis subject, Governor Heller?MR. HELLER. Yes. I would stay away from setting an explicittarget right now and then note that we are thinking of re-establishinga target at some later time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a range of opinion. I don'tsee anybody saying we should have a target of the traditional type, asopposed to a monitoring range. I will make a couple of observations.I think I am repeating what other people said but--even setting fortha monitoring range the way we did [in July] or as we do for debt Idon't think is very helpful, because we are likely to be either wayabove or, in some conditions, way below. I would hate to be in aposition where every indication was to tighten up and we've got all ofthese interest elasticity [unintelligible]. I'm not particularlyexpecting that in the short run but, over time, we may want to tightenup and if we have great interest elasticity and M1 runs low peoplewill say: You are running below that 5 percent target, how can youpossibly tighten up under those conditions? So I have a real concernin both directions about setting forth a target, even a monitoringrange, just pure and simple.I share some of the concerns about promising too much from astudy. I would suggest that we say we are going to get back to it atmidyear. It seems likely that the study is going to show that almostanything we look at has a lot of interest elasticity and that gives usthe problem that we are not going to be in any position--. Obviously,nobody can oppose a study. It's just a matter of the way it's stated,as Mr. Boehne just said. However, I think we can say something that12/15-16/86would be useful. And that probably would be something along thelines--I haven't quite visualized a box, but that's a subsidiarypoint--that we think we know something about Ml and how it behaves ina very broad way. I think we probably could say something like: undernormal or specified conditions, we would think it would rise at a pacesomewhat around nominal GNP and we think that a nominal GNP--I'm notsure I'd state it quite this way--of around 5-1/2 or 6 percent isappropriate. And if interest rates weren't changing, that's what wewould expect. But if other things happened and interest rates wentup, we would expect M1 to run low, and the public shouldn't besurprised by that; if interest rates were declining and the economywas soft, we would expect M1 to run high. If inflation is down, wewouldn't be disturbed by a higher figure; if inflation is rising andinterest rates are rising, we wouldn't be disturbed by a lower figure.Everyone ought to understand that that's the way we will appraise Ml--as a kind of supplementary device to the other targets, withoutputting it in the box, or setting a monitoring range per se. We mightfootnote it or something. I don't know how much one can say in a box.It's a visual point, but I think we could have a useful discussion ofM1 indicating the kinds of conditions under which we would bedisturbed or not disturbed by a big slowdown or a greater increase.That might be more useful than anything else.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I didn't mean literally within thebox. All I meant to say is that I thought it should not be buried onpage 28 of the testimony--that it should get some prominence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Page 16?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You know what I mean!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we could have a discussion of Ml.Maybe we could mention studies and all of this other stuff. I didn'tlook at it very carefully, but I think we could say that we are notignoring it, but that we find ourselves unable just to give a simplerange that encompasses all the significance of it. [How we view] itwould depend upon circumstances, and we can try to describe thecircumstances. The trouble is that this is getting too complicated,obviously. The basic point that we would make is that we think M1 hasa lot of interest elasticity and an increase or a decrease should notbe a surprise if there are changes in interest rates that may beappropriate for other reasons.MR. ANGELL. But, of course, without a change in interestrates now for four months, where we normally have an interestelasticity problem, it seems we also may have an increase in demandfor financial assets that may continue even in a period of stableinterest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is correct. If you thoughtthat was a great big possibility, unlike those nice little equationsMr. Kohn has, the less you can say about it or the more vaguely yousay anything--MR. BLACK. I think Jerry's concern is that if you bury ittoo deeply then you may not be able to exhume it if you need it.12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what "exhume it if you needit" means. If it really has a lot of interest elasticity, I am notsure what the exhumation means.MR. BLACK. Well, that may change some over time. I hope--MR. JOHNSON. The one thing that might be possible, if wewant to have any kind of picture at all to illustrate it, would be tohave two sets of parallel lines imposed on the same graph instead ofhaving a cone shaped target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have three-dimensional graphs?MR. JOHNSON. You wouldn't need a three-dimensional graph;you could have one inside the other. One would be associated withstable interest rates and the other would be associated with volatileinterest rates.MR. HELLER. Make it out of rubber!MR. ANGELL. One thing we might do is, without any monitoringrange, to suggest that the Federal Open Market Committee mightreinstitute quarterly ranges at any time that it deemed appropriate.That would give us the chance, in case circumstances changed wherebywe believed that we had an inflationary tension that neededcorrecting, we could then institute a quarterly target without settingup an annual target.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That is kind of the thought that Iwould mention at the end of what I suggested: that the range we haveisn't really a monitoring range in the sense that we have used thatterm historically; it's just a statement of what we would expect tohappen in somewhat normal conditions. But we could add on to that thethought that, in a context in which GNP, velocity, and inflation wererising, the Committee would be prepared to reconsider Ml as a target--or something like that without being specific about a quarterlytarget.MR. ANGELL. Even though I asked for a monitoring range, I amhappy to join this consensus.MR. BOEHNE. Instead of monitoring range, maybe a better termwould be an observation area, or something like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, implicit in what I am saying,anyway, is that we will continue to observe Ml. I don't know exactlywhat the right wording is, but we would observe it within someanalytic framework, if we could state it. [Unintelligible], I'mafraid, unless Mr. Kohn can give me a little more reassurance than hegave me yesterday.MR. KOHN. I think the model would say it's close to onepercent, but I think it's still in a period of evolution.MR. MORRIS. Plus or minus one percent?MR. KOHN. Plus one percent, in terms of velocity.-34-12/15-16/86MR. JOHNSON. Adjusted for income and interest rates.MR. KOHN. Well, adjusted for interest rates.MR. BLACK. Don, how likely do you think it will be thateventually we will get to the point where these rates paid on othercheckable deposits will vary pretty directly with market rates?MR. KOHN. I think that's possible but, as I indicatedyesterday, I think some of the interest elasticity that we areobserving now may be exaggerated. If the offering rates begin to moveup or down with market rates then we would observe what the elasticityis with respect to market rates. But it's still going to be verysubstitutable, at the margin, with other closely related deposits. Idon't think that we will get back to where we were before.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I sense we have gone about as far as wecan go on this subject this morning. I have a little work to dobefore the next meeting. Does anybody want to express any views, in avery preliminary way, about the M2 and M3 targets that we settled ontentatively last time? What were they: 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent [forboth]? Does that still seem about right or does anybody have a strongview for something different than that? This would be very tentativeat this point.MR. MORRIS. I have been trying to think about why it is thatthe broader aggregates, including L, have been growing more rapidlyrelative to the nominal GNP. The only thing that I have been able tocome up with is that in recent years, with the decline in interestrates, we have had a big increase in the value of financial assets inthe hands of consumers and businesses--a big increase in stock pricesand bond prices also. In fact, financial assets have been growingmore rapidly than nominal GNP. So if an investor wanted to maintainliquid assets at a constant proportion of his portfolio and the otherfinancial assets were growing more rapidly than GNP then his liquidassets would have to grow faster than nominal GNP as well. Now,whether that is the answer to it, I don't know, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your projection [would be] that if we hada great crash and stock prices went down people would want to holdless liquidity then, if your argument is symmetrical.MR. MORRIS. They would, certainly; if we had a greatdepression then liquidity would go down.MR. ANGELL. What kind of depression?MR. MORRIS. [Unintelligible.] What Paul is talking about isa great crash.MR. ANGELL. I thought you said great deflation.MR. MORRIS. Well, a stock market crash would lead to areduction in the rate of growth of liquid assets, even if people triedto improve their position or maintain it. If incomes are dropping,that's going to be difficult to do. But if that theory has anyvalidity to it--and I am not sure it does--it means that when thefinancial assets start growing at about the same rate as nominal GNP,12/15-16/86you would expect that the liquid assets would go back to their priorgrowth rates relative to nominal GNP. I don't know whether this makesany sense to you, Don, or not.MR. KOHN. Those wealth variables we have do, I think, havebearing on M2 growth and on the broad aggregates; it makes some sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does this lead you to the conclusion thatthe targets should be changed?MR. MORRIS. It leads me to conclude that we probably shouldnot reduce the ranges for the broader aggregates. My tentative ideawas to cut half of one percent from the 6 to 9 percent range for thisyear. I don't see that there is any case for doing that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you can argue the opposite on thebasis of your knowledge.MR. MORRIS. Not, I think, while interest rates are stillhigh relative to the inflation rate. If you promise that interestrates are going to continue to move toward their normal relationshipto the inflation rate, and if that stays low, then you would expectthe value of financial assets to continue to rise relative to GNP fora while.MR. HELLER. Mr. Morris makes an important point there,because I think it really explains a lot of the past behavior that wehave seen. The trouble with it is that if you are trying to use itfor forecasting purposes you first have to forecast what the stockmarket and the bond market are going to do, and that's probably justas tough as anything else that we've seen. But you can get morestable functions that way; I fully agree with you.MR. JOHNSON. There may be some reason to believe that. Idon't know how long this stock adjustment will go on either, becauseof the change in the environment, but it wouldn't bother me--and itmight give off an important message--if we could find a way to lowerthose broader targets a bit.MR. BLACK. Particularly if we drop the M1 target, I think ithas a message there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. Under the assumption of little or no change ininterest rates in 1987 and the kind of nominal growth that isincorporated in the staff's forecast, on the basis of the staff'sanalysis and some analysis that we have done we think we would getgrowth of M2 and M3 at the lower end of the tentative ranges. Infact, we got 5 to 6 percent on M2 and 6 to 7 percent on M3. It seemsto me that one could argue for perhaps a 1/2 percentage pointreduction in the existing tentative targets [for 1987]--to somewherearound 5 to 8 percent.MR. MORRIS. Well, maybe that's something that we need to getfurther counseling on from Mr. Kohn--[whether his work] indicates thathalf of one percentage point is not a matter of major consequence.12/15-16/86VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would just make the observationthat for every one of those financial assets there is a financialliability, too. One of our problems, looking a little beyond M2 and8-1/2 or 9 percent is the liability structure of the economy as awhole. In some ways it is what's driving the increase in some ofthese asset-based measures. And I think that is still a major concernover the long haul. That's one of the things that creates apreference on my part to try and shave off that half point, eventhough I am under no illusions about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shave it more?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, just shave the half pointbecause in the long run--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Keep it where we have it?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we have no evidence that1987 is going to be substantially different from 1986. I look at the1986 M2 and M3 target bands and see that in January and February wewere running a little below. And if we want them as targets I presumethat means that when they run low we ought to be easing; andhindsight, I think, would tell us that it would have been okay to havesome accommodation in that [early 1986] period. But we also found aperiod of time when we ran up to the 9 percent range. Now, if wewanted to be at 8-1/2 percent--if the targets mean anything--we wouldhave to say that we should have screwed it down a little tighter inJuly and August and September. I am not sure that there is evidenceof that [being desirable]. I would prefer not to get into wishfulthinking about bringing the M2 and M3 [ranges] down until we haveevidence. I might be persuaded at the February meeting that 8-1/2percent and 5-1/2 percent are satisfactory, but hindsight mightsuggest that 9 percent may not have been too bad.MR. PARRY. But the forecast for 1987 is quite different thanthe experience for 1986 in terms of interest rates, and that's one ofthe most significant factors in determining the growth of theaggregates. So why wouldn't that make a difference in your view?MR. ANGELL. But if you went back a year ago and asked theFOMC what its interest rate forecast was, some of what has happenedmay have been unexpected. It may very well be that we do not knowwhether the economy, for sure, is going to be growing at a 4 percentreal path--or 3 percent, or even 1-1/2 percent.MR. PARRY. Yes, but you have to base your determination onexpected values and we are expecting--or at least the staff forecastis--that there will be no change in rates. If one thought that rateswere coming down, that would certainly give a lot of reason to supportthat. If you buy the idea that rates were not going to change verymuch, why wouldn't you expect a significant slowing?MR. ANGELL. Well, because I am not so sure that the economywill be growing at a 3 percent real path or a 6 percent nominal path.12/15-16/86It may very well be that we will have been inaccurate or not have beenable to foresee that. We might be on a path that is conducive tolower interest rates; if so, would we want to have an M2 target thatrestrained us and caused us to tighten in an environment in which theeconomy was growing at a real path of, say, 1-1/2 percent and anominal path of 4 percent?MR. PARRY. Change it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're coming perilously close to havingno target at all. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. It seems to me that last July we established thetentative ranges and reduced them by 1/2 of a percent, really, todeliver a message--namely, that we were going to continue to controlinflation. That must really be an important part of any kind ofmechanistic result. Changes at this point, if we don't have asubstantial reason for doing them, would give a rather false message.Therefore, I would be in favor of maintaining the tentative rangesthat we set out last summer to continue that message.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else want to offer some commentson this subject? I will take silence as indicating at least that youare not more than 1/2 point away from the range in either direction.I guess we have established a broad band.MR. JOHNSON. I think the elasticities for the broaderaggregates are such that there is a lot of tolerance in the currentranges. We can still see 15 to 16 percent Ml growth as consistentwith 6 to 9 percent [growth in the broader aggregates]. That's why Idon't think a 1/2 point reduction, or some small symbolic reduction inthe target, is a real danger.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will give Mr. Kohn the last word. Justrefresh our collective minds, given your assumptions or Mr. Kichline'sassumptions: What is the probable range in which M2 and M3 are likelyto come in?MR. KOHN. Well, Mr. Chairman, that's a difficult question inpart because the models, as Mr. Parry said, give us some pretty lownumbers for [monetary] growth next year--especially if you assume thatdepository institutions are going to adjust down their offering rates,increasing the opportunity cost of holding M2 [assets]. However, I amnot sure I believe the models in many cases, but particularly in thiscase. So if I gave you a purely model-based forecast, looking acrossdifferent models, I could give you anywhere from 9-1/2 percent for theMinneapolis VAR model to the 5 to 7 percent that the non-VAR modelsare clustered around.MR. JOHNSON. That sounds almost like General Motor's range.MR. KOHN. Similar to General Motor's models. But when youlook under the hood, that sounds low to me; so I think a little higherthan that would be more likely.MR. JOHNSON. It is true, I think, that after-tax real long-run interest rates are even slightly negative. If you take themarginal [income tax] rate off the nominal interest rate and then take-38-12/15-16/86[out] about a 3 or 4 percent inflation expectation, you have anegative number on longer-term rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can turn to what we have todecide this morning. Before we do that I would open the floor forcomments on the [economic] situation and outlook. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. In the Mid-Atlantic part of the country,economic performance is mostly positive. We have sensed a pickup inmanufacturing activity in recent months; retailers report fairly brisksales; construction, both residential and non-residential, is doingwell; and loan growth in my District is running about twice thenational rate. Unemployment rates are well under the national rate,particularly in New Jersey, Delaware and the Southeast quadrant ofPennsylvania. We are also seeing some wage hikes that are higher thanthe national average, as one would expect, particularly in the growingindustries in our District. The outlook is generally positivealthough bankers doubt that loan growth will continue in 1987 as ithas in 1986.On the national economy, I find myself in broad agreementwith the staff: 2-1/2 to 3 percent real growth and around 4 percent orso on inflation, which for the fifth year of a recovery isn't all thatbad. The only word of caution that I would pass on--and it's largelyanecdotal and I don't know what to make out of it--is that ourexaminers are reporting more noticeable deterioration in consumer loanportfolios, especially the credit card portfolios of some of the bigcredit card issuers in Delaware. I had lunch with some merchants inpart of the District a week or so ago and they reported that more andmore potential sales are being turned down because people are hittingthe ceiling on their credit cards. And I had lunch with some creditcard people and they talked about something called a special lendingoption program--SLOP for short--for people who have bad creditratings. They lend to them with higher interest rates and extracollateral and so forth. Again, I don't know what to make out ofthat. But there is somewhat of a pawn shop mentality in banking withhome equity loans and all that; and maybe the consumer is running outthe string to some extent and bankers are not being all that prudentin trying to put some limits on that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, our view hasn't changed much sincethe last meeting. We are substantially in agreement with the staffforecast, and for the Fourth District that staff forecast, if it cametrue, would not be a bad outcome. It would give us some more time tocarry through the further restructuring process that is under way inour heavy manufacturing sector. We continue to experience plantclosings and structural changes and, of course, the size and speed ofthe adjustments is closely related to the impact of the exchangerates. A period of slow growth would be basically a good outcome forus on that front. There is a hopeful note on the export side in ourDistrict. In talking to our directors and to other businessmen, wedon't have a profusion of new export orders to report but we do have asignificant increase in the number of inquiries from foreigncustomers, and their attitudes seem to be much more receptive than wehave noted in the past. Beyond that, there is also a feeling that thethrust of imports into specific markets has not been as strong as it12/15-16/86was. We have hope on another front as well--on the employment growthin our District. To take the Ohio numbers alone, in the last yearOhio employment has grown faster than the nation as a whole,significantly fueled by employment in the services sector, and withinthat, in the business services sector. On the negative side, not onlyin our bank but in our District many feel that the risks connectedwith the 1987 forecast are on the down side. That feeling stems fromthe straightforward reasoning that the trade accounts may not turnaround as much as anticipated in the forecast and that the businessinvestment sector may not be particularly strong. So it's easy topicture an economy that won't, in fact, be growing in the 2 to 3percent range. It would be nice to be able to identify some trulybright spots to counter the skepticism but so far I haven't been ableto do that. On the retail sales side, we see in our District much ofwhat was reported yesterday as the national trend; we see soft retailsales with a slightly stronger durables component. Our retailers saythey have plenty of traffic in their stores but that just isn'tresulting in the kind of sales they expect. They are, of course,reacting with discounting and waiting to see what the last few days[of the Christmas shopping season] will bring.I will end with a note on the agricultural situation in ourDistrict. We have a fairly small agricultural sector and it's fairlydiverse. But I report this just because it seems rather interesting.Up until just a few months ago, three months ago maybe, the attitudein our District was that somehow the agricultural situation--landprices and income pressures on farm banks and on good farmers--hadreached a plateau. This view has shifted significantly in the lastcouple of months under the weight of good crops and the low pricesassociated with them and the huge federal outlays. We now have a viewamong quite a wide range of people--from bankers to other observers inour District--that there is going to be another significant adjustmentin land prices and in farm programs as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. Our forecast is about as close as one could getto that of the staff. We feel confident that the fourth quarter willshow strength of 3 percent or more; I think the available nationalstatistics on production, sales, inventories, and employment wouldsupport such a conclusion. Plus, what we see in the Twelfth Districtis indicative of a strong economic picture for the fourth quarter.When I look at 1987, one of the things I would note is that, first ofall, we do have a fairly sharp slowdown expected in the first quarter;and we have a fair amount of uncertainty about how sharp that slowdownmight turn out to be. We expect it to be centered on weakness in bothnonresidential and residential investment spending. We still don'thave much of a handle on what the effect of the tax reform is likelyto be in 1987. It seems likely that it is providing some strength tothe current quarter and also, given the timing of some of the changesin taxes in 1987, that it will be a negative for next year. Withregard to the trade sector, which we have talked of as a key factor,we did some studies based upon alternative assumptions of the speed ofpassthrough of import prices and what that might do in terms of thedemand for imports. And any statistical study we did produced agreater improvement than we have in our forecast and that the Boardstaff has in its forecast. In addition, regional anecdotal evidencesuggests--12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that mean you get a high price forimports?MR. PARRY. No. Even if one uses some of the series that donot have much of a passthrough, you still get a sharper slowing inimports than is included in our judgmental forecast and in the Boardstaff forecasts that we have seen. So I think we are running onjudgmental forecasts as far as imports.MR. HELLER. How about import prices? Do they go up? Isthat what you are saying?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Import prices don't go up all that much.What he is saying is that you get a big improvement.MR. PARRY. Right--faster than what we have. In other words,if you look at the statistical studies, we all seem to be takingconservative positions with regard to the net exports. That's notvery comforting, given what we have seen to date. We have someregional anecdotal evidence that suggests more signs of a pickup inexport volumes in the Twelfth District. There has been a strongpickup in foreign demand for aircraft. We have had foreign orders forelectronic products, including computer graphics and certain measuringdevices. There is some additional demand for agricultural exports andnot much sign at all of any declines in imports, I might point out.It appears as though the bottom line, as far as the net export sectoris concerned, is that there is a chance of some positive surprises inthe trade account.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On that happy note we will hear from Mr.Melzer.MR. MELZER. In the Eighth District, conditions continue tobe pretty good. We have had good non-ag employment growth in the lastthree-month period--about a full percentage point greater thannationally. Retail sales are a little slower than the nationalgrowth. In a sense, a surprising area of strength continues to beboth residential and nonresidential construction: in the most recentthree-month period through October we have had annual rates of growthof 20 percent in residential and 16 percent in nonresidential.Following up on that, real estate lending has been very strong atDistrict financial institutions; there also has been a notable pickupin commercial lending activity. I would say that some anecdotalcomments we hear tend to bear that out. In Louisville, for the firsttime since I have been involved, I have heard people mention a pickupin manufacturing activity there, particularly among smallermanufacturers. Homebuilders in the St. Louis area are expecting to donext year maybe 90 percent of what they have done this year in thesingle-family area, with multifamily construction down substantially.There continues to be anxiety about the Christmas selling season;there is evidence of a lot of promotional activity in the newspapersand some talk of price cutting, but that still remains to be seen. Iwould say that in general the anxieties remain what we have heardabout before--in terms of the consumer in the first quarter of nextyear, capital spending early next year, and so forth.Overall, our outlook on economic activity would be somewhatstronger than the Board staff's, though not substantially. On the12/15-16/86price side, we believe there is somewhat greater risk. But in generalI would be quite satisfied if we achieved the 2.7 percent growth thatthe Board staff is looking for next year. As Mrs. Horn was saying,that sort of growth rate tends to facilitate the kind of adjustmentthat we need to see in order to get the trade situation into betterbalance.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [The staff's forecast is] 2.8 percent, tobe precise. A few people were talking about housing starts; a housingstarts figure came out this morning, which I am sure Mr. Kichline canreport to you.MR. KICHLINE. Housing starts were at a 1.6 million unitannual rate in November. That's just about 2 percent below October.All of the decline is in the multifamily area and, regionally, all ofthe decline is in the South. It's a shade weaker than we had builtinto the forecast, but not much.MR. MORRIS. What about building permits?MR. KICHLINE. They are up and very close to starts. Theyare up about 2 percent, surprisingly all in the multifamily area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Conditions in our District remain very muchunchanged and are certainly consistent with the trends that have beenin place for so many months now. The unevenness which has been afeature of this whole cycle in our area certainly continues. Theplant closings are a tangible sign of all of this. The last time wetalked a bit about the GM plant closings that we thought would takeplace. That announcement, of course, has been made and it certainlyhas had an enormously negative impact on the District, particularly inMichigan where they are going to be fairly hard hit. Since then therehave been quite a number of plant closings announced, and I must saythat I find it distressing at this stage of the cycle to keep havingthis phenomenon take place.As I look ahead to next year--to say the obvious, I suppose--the two major questions are: 1) inflation; and 2) the trade picture.On the inflation side, I have this feeling that once we get the energyand food effects through the cycle we are going to be into afundamentally higher underlying rate of inflation; but no one that Italked to confirms that. My sense is that market pressures are very,very tight. People are holding down on their raw material purchasesvery substantially and, in turn, aren't able to pass price increaseson their products through to the market. Of course, the operatingratios and the continuation of favorable labor contract settlementstend to confirm that. Our outlook, therefore, for the inflationnumber next year is quite similar to the staff's. The issue of thetrade picture I find equally perplexing, given the large decline inthe value of the dollar. It just has to make sense that we are in abetter position at this point than we were before; and I would saythat the people I talked to are sensing better export opportunitiesthan they had before and, certainly, an improvement in the tradepicture is fundamental to our outlook for next year. But one issuethat I find a little troubling is the enormous disparity between ourwage rates and those of some of the major foreign competitors. To12/15-16/86give an example of this: I was in last week and had a chanceto talk to the general manager of with six orseven plants around the world; and they have a good one in Mexico.Wage rates in are $23.00 an hour; wage rates in Mexico are$1.00 an hour. Not only is that surprising but the productivity inMexico is better than it is in and even more surprising, thequality standards in Mexico are better than they are inCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are they investing more in Mexico?MR. KEEHN. He says they are investing more in Mexico, giventhat it's a pretty easy decision. The thing I find bothersome aboutthat is that you can have an awful lot of currency value decline andyou can't quite make up for that kind of disparity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need a 95 percent depreciation in theMexico peso!MR. KEEHN. Admittedly, that's a pretty narrow product line.Putting it in a broader perspective, our anticipation is that therewill be improvement here. I would end my comments by saying that ouroutlook with regard to the growth picture as well as the other majoreconomic indicators is very much in line with the staff's forecast.We certainly expect a continuation of the expansion through the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, our forecast is very much likethe Greenbook's and I too would be very happy if we got 2.7 or 2.8percent, whatever it happens to be. But I would repeat what I saidlast month: that I think the risk is on the down side.With respect to the regional economy, developments showcontinued strength in almost all of the urban areas but weakness inthe rural areas, particularly in the agricultural and energy-dependentsectors. Christmas retail sales have been fairly good so far, againin those urban areas, although in a lot of the large urban centersthere has been a rapid proliferation of stores and that has kept theunit gains fairly [modest]. The black spot in our District, ofcourse, is Louisiana, which is basically in a depression. The onlygood news that you can find there at all--if indeed it is good, butyou grasp at almost any straw here--is that the rig count hasstabilized and maybe even picked up a bit. People down there are nowsaying that a $15.00 oil price would be a viable price to begin toaccelerate some exploration. Now, that's a lower price than we haveheard before. The farm sector also is fairly depressed in most areasof the Southeast. We are looking for greater liquidation, mostly dueto the drought that we suffered last summer. More and more farmersare being forced to the wall and land prices continue to plummet inmany areas. In the housing sector, we are finding generally thatsingle-family home construction is picking up in several areas inresponse to sales of new homes. I don't know how that squares withthe latest numbers, but that was the information that we had.Nonresidential construction is off. So it's a very mixed picture, Mr.Chairman, in the Southeast. Despite that, there is still a fairdegree of confidence among most people outside of Louisiana that weare going to have continued expansion in 1987. There is the evidencethat the trade situation is turning around and there is an expectation12/15-16/86on the part of people in the export-related areas that they are goingto see improvement in 1987.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, the Eleventh District has remainedmuch the way it was when we reported at the last meeting. We continueto think that we are at the trough, statistically at least; we thinkthere is going to be some improvement in 1987. We just did our ownforecast for the District and we think we will do about half as wellas the national forecast. That does key off the national forecast,because we think that's where most of our strength is going to be--thespillover effect from that--and we do pretty much agree with thestaff's forecast. Also, if oil prices are in the $13.00 to $16.00range we have a little optimism there, and that's built into ourforecast. We have had a little improvement in non-ag employment inthe District, although the Texas unemployment rate is still holding at9-1/2 percent versus 7 percent for the nation. Of the eight highestunemployment rates [for cities] around the country, we have five ofthem in Texas. It depends on where you happen to be; if you are inMcAllen, Texas it's 19 percent. Agriculture presents a bit of a mixedbag. If you are in the livestock business, it's looking pretty good;if not, it still looks bad or not very encouraging. The high-tech andrelated areas look pretty good.One reason I said that, statistically, we think we are at thetrough is that, anecdotally, we are about the only ones who thinkthat. Comments of our directors and reports from around the Districttend to be more negative in that we get very little encouragement. Intrying to figure out why that is, I think it is probably that ourdirectors don't have the same view of the national economy's growththat we have. In other words, they have a feeling that growth is notgoing to be as strong as we think it will. So, while there is notanything really to brag about openly, we are going to go along andgradually improve.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A little vignette in Texasis actually goingto try to export some steel to Japan. That's a--MR. BOYKIN. I'd say two things about that: it's an unusualplant and it's an unusual individual.MS. SEGER. Will they let it in or will it have to sit on aboat for three years?MR. BOYKIN. That he is going to find out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. The economic recovery in the Ninth Districtremains intact, with all of the imbalances that we have discussed inthe past persisting as well. Anecdotally, it seems that holidaysales, at least in the metropolitan areas, are pretty good so far. Ihave not heard any concerns expressed recently about how that wasshaping up.12/15-16/86At the national level, certainly, the latest spate ofevidence seems to me to be consistent with something like the staff'sGreenbook forecast. My own view is that there is some chance--or thatit would not be that difficult at least to try to build a case--thatin fact we might do a little better over the next four or fivequarters than the Greenbook suggests. When I consider that, I comeback to the view that maybe something like the Greenbook outlook iswhat we will achieve, in fact. It seems to me that ongoingimbalances, both in the economy and in fiscal policy, are likely torestrain the private sector sufficiently that perhaps something likethe Greenbook performance is what we will get and is about as good aswe can expect to get.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. I think the staff's projection for real GNP isstill reasonable both for the fourth quarter and for 1987. Likeeverybody else, we were impressed by the November report onemployment; and I think the staff was right to revise their figures upon that basis. But I really believe that the near-term outlook ismore uncertain than it has been for some little time. It seems thatone month we get a series of good reports and the next month they areall bad; we keep flip-flopping back and forth as these reports comein. But for three reasons, I am now concluding that the risk may beon the down side. One reason is in the foreign trade sector. I amparticularly uneasy about the rapid improvement of the net exports ofgoods and services projected for the fourth quarter by the staff.Even taking account of the likely slant in petroleum imports, I thinkthere's certainly better than an even chance that we are eventuallygoing to see some improvement on the trade side; at the same time,this strong and increasing competition from some of the smaller Asiancountries and rather lackluster performance in the German economy inthe third quarter lead us to think that the improvement might not bequite as great as most people are assuming. I guess it was Bob Parrya while ago who suggested that it might be stronger now, and Icertainly hope that he's right on that. I am a little worried by it.We are disturbed for a second reason by this continueddeceleration in residential [construction] and new home sales; and wegot a new figure that sort of confirmed that this morning. Finally,we are not as confident about the prospects for consumer expendituresas we were at the last meeting.the head of a large department store reportedthat sales had literally dried up right at Thanksgiving, after havingbeen very good before then. This was a nationwide phenomenon ratherthan something simply confined to the area; we get the samekind of reports from other retailers in our area. And I can't helpbut think that some of this strength we are seeing--even in itemsother than automobiles--is an acceleration of purchases by those fewpeople who itemize their sales tax deductions in order to takeadvantage of that this year on big-ticket items before next year whenthe tax is not deductible.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our view is very closeto, and consistent with, the Greenbook forecast. I think that is anacceptable outlook, and I would join those who say that if we achieve12/15-16/862.7 or 2.8 percent growth in the fifth year of recovery, that's apretty good record given the projection for prices.On the regional front, the situation has not changed greatlyfrom what has been reported before--that is, we have an unevenrecovery, with severely depressed conditions in the energy,agricultural, and aircraft sectors of the economy. I suppose we cantake some comfort from the fact that our most recent agriculturalsurvey shows that the decline in agricultural real estate values ismoderating. That is the second quarter in a row in which declineshave averaged only 2 percent, as contrasted with earlier declines of 6to 7 percent in each quarter. Those values now are roughly 50 percentof what they were in 1981 at their highs. I take some comfort fromthe discussion about exports, particularly Ted Truman's indicationyesterday that agricultural exports have picked up. I must tell you,however, that we don't see any of that activity in the Tenth District.As a matter of fact, the crop this year has been a bumper cropvirtually across all crop lines, and the good news is that the redmeat industry--both beef and hogs--together with the governmentsubsidies are returning some cash income to our agriculturalproducers.On the energy side, there has been a bit of an uptick in therig count from 215 to 223; that's cited as a great improvement in ourDistrict! But having met last week with a very small group ofOklahoma businessmen, I can tell you that pessimism pervades that partof the country, both because of energy and agriculture. And thesituation regarding bank failures is very, very gloomy; they can seeno light at the end of the tunnel, if you will, so they are justhunkering down and hoping that something magic happens that will bringthem out of this depressed state. I don't see what that will beeither, I might tell you. In the aircraft industry, there is afurther decline--that is, layoffs, simply because they cannot competeon an international basis given the value of the dollar and there isno [new] domestic demand for purchases of aircraft, largely because ofthe very big pool of used aircraft. As companies have cut back overthe years, one of the first things that went was their airplane. As aresult, new aircraft just are not coming off the line or selling, sothe industry is simply laying off the people. All in all, it seems tome that we have quite a long ways to go in the Tenth District to jointhe rest of the country in the recovery. But it seems to me that theGreenbook forecast is quite reasonable for the nation as a whole.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. Perhaps the story that Si Keehn mentioned aboutthe plant closings in the Midwest and the hit that certain states,including my own, are going to take made me feel a little lessoptimistic about both the current state of the national economy andalso the outlook for next year. I think that some of the apparentstrength at the moment is related to tax reform and is primarilydriven by businesses and some individuals trying to push theirtransactions into 1986 rather than do them in early 1987. Anotherportion arises from inventory building and, unfortunately, I thinkpart of that is involuntary. In fact, using our own staff estimates Ibelieve that $25 billion out of the $40 billion or so increase in realGNP in the fourth quarter comes from the inventory swing. So I'm just-46-12/15-16/86wondering if maybe the first half of 1987 could be quite a bit weakerthan we presently expect it to be.If you'll allow me, I'd like to give you some comments I gotfrom a top automotive analyst yesterday about what's going on there.I found them very interesting. He thinks that somewhere between100,000 and 200,000 new car sales are being pushed into this year fromnext year for tax reasons, namely to get the sales tax deduction.Some other unknown quantity of sales was generated this year by thetremendous interest rate incentives that we all know about. Those tooare likely borrowed from 1987 but the exact amount of the borrowing isnot known. The bottom line of his analysis is that total new carsales in 1987 will be about 75,000 below what they're running in 1986and that import sales will be flat. So the whole hit will come on thedomestic side. Also he made a big point--and he does not work forGeneral Motors by the way--about the inventory situation at GeneralMotors. At the end of November GM dealers were already up to 85 days'supply of unsold new cars. More importantly, if you look at some ofthe individual models, their stocks are running above 100 days'supply. Earlier this year when GM had problems with excessiveinventories their response was to launch another incentive program andtry to "buy" sales, shall we say. But that was a very expensive wayto go in order to maintain production stability and their marketshare. So the betting now is that when GM has this excessiveinventory situation they are going to pare their production schedules.I don't sense that we have enough of that paring in our numbers,particularly what will likely hit early next year. Also, I'm not surethat we are taking enough out on the commercial building side. I justhave a gut reaction that office construction could be a lot weakerthan we are presently estimating. Salomon Brothers had an interestingpresentation showing that over the past 12 months the new officeconstruction put in place has been off about 14 percent and that theboom that has been running from 1979 to 1986 has raised the vacancyrate from 3.6 percent up to 24 percent in the suburbs and almost 17percent in downtown markets. Using their estimates and running withcurrent demand levels, they think we'd have to get a 50 percentdecline in new construction in order to bring back single-digitvacancy rates by the early 1990s. I found that rather startling.Finally, I really believe that the tax reform is going to take anotherbite out of business spending and that it possibly will be weaker--notjust in the first half of the year but in the whole year--than we'represently expecting. So, I just think that sometime we ought to askourselves if maybe we are running the risk of a recession sometime inearly 1987. I'm not arguing that we are, but I think maybe we oughtto consider that possibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else wants to contribute to this?MR. HELLER. Oh, I guess if we have to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. HELLER. Overall, I'm in broad agreement with the staffforecast. I think their numbers are eminently reasonable. I'm a bitmore optimistic on the consumer; I'm not only looking at the high debtlevels, but also at the high asset growth that they've experienced andsome interesting data that were brought to our attention recently; thelatter show that the net worth of the consumer is now at its highest12/15-16/86point in relation to personal income in the last decade. So, itreally doesn't mean that the consumer has to fall off the cliff, as alot of the debt-watchers would make us believe. Furthermore, taxreform will clearly be a positive picture for the consumer. Startingon January 1 there will be bigger pay checks--maybe even for thefederal employees, who knows? The bad surprise for the consumer willonly come in April '88 when he realizes that his deductions and theold tax shelters have been gone for the last year and that he has tocome up with a tax payment. But I don't think it will influenceconsumer behavior a lot before then.On the foreign trade sector--well, I hope Bob Parry is right.But I don't see an awful lot of growth in the foreign economies, and Ithink it is very difficult for American producers, given the currentsituation and current exchange rates, to increase their market shares.So, on the export side, I don't think we will see as much progress ashas been hoped for. I think we will be making the progress on theimport substitution side because American producers clearly are morecompetitive, although some of the numbers will be skewed--for instanceby the automobile plant building in this country and foreign plants ingeneral that have been [unintelligible]. On investment, I'm not quiteas pessimistic as some people. I think it's important for themanufacturers to see the sales going up rather than just looking atthe tax incentives; and as long as sales are sustained they will alsostart to invest again. Overall, as I said earlier, I'm in broadagreement with the staff's GNP forecast for growth of slightly below 3percent.MR. JOHNSON. I'm generally in agreement with the staffforecast, too. I think there are some risks, as indicated by thesensitivity of things to the exchange rate. That was illustratedyesterday by the notion about what's riding on the further 10 percentdecline, to some extent. But even if you cut back [growth by] 6/10thsit's not the end of the world. After 4 years of expansion, I thinkit's very unusual and very comforting to know that cost/pricepressures are as moderate as they are at this stage. I don't think wehave ever, at least in the postwar period, entered a recession withthe moderate kind of cost/price pressures [we are seeing] at thisstage. So, I'm reasonably optimistic that the expansion willcontinue. I think it's a question of by how much. I think there isthis continuing dichotomy in the [financial] system and in the economythat's still a bit troublesome. But over time, the change in thedollar is going to improve that. There's a long adjustment periodstill ahead to work out all of the inflation excesses of the past.But I'm fairly optimistic that expansion will continue. I'm a littleconcerned that the expansion in the first half of the year may showsome transitory problems, and I think we ought to remain flexible forthat; I don't think it's likely to be deadly. So, I agree with thestaff assessment but I think the risks are a bit on the down side.MR. ANGELL. My view is very similar to Mr. Johnson's andmany others around the table, and that is that the staff forecastseems to me the most likely event. I would have a slightly lower CPInumber. But I must admit that I only overestimated the rate ofinflation one time in the last seven years; so I put my CPI at 3percent, hoping that I'll have another overestimate in here sometime.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does the staff have for the CPI?12/15-16/86MR. ANGELL. 3.7 isn't it?MR. HELLER. 3.7.MR. ANGELL. 3.7 percent on the CPI, 2.7 percent on thefixed--MR. KICHLINE. We have 1.4 percent this year and 3.7 percentnext year.MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. MORRIS. How much of that is attributable to the oilprice increase assumption?MR. KICHLINE. Well, let's see--MR. ANGELL. Basically, my view is that taking food andenergy out in an attempt to get a baseline is just not a very accurateway to go, because when you take food and energy out then you have theservices sector, which is such a large portion of what's left. So Ifeel uncomfortable with any inflation forecast that takes food andenergy out because then we have what I call a measurement problem. Ithink many of you see that measurement problem in the service sector,and I think that just keeps our baseline inflation rate a little toohigh. So, I am a little more optimistic on inflation, but I certainlyappreciate what I would call the staff's "within the range" forecastthere. My concern is that even though the fourth quarter seems tohave some strength to it, it seems to me a very vulnerable strength;we could end up the quarter in a rather fragile and vulnerableposition. I see that in terms of world imbalances. We continue tohave these huge saving rates in Japan and western Europe and we haveother countries that are almost synonymous to farmers and oil peoplein the United States that have these huge debts. There's nothingreally happening internationally, it seems to me, to cause that basicstructural position to improve. So we're kind of patching together aninternational problem which is of grave concern. It seems to me thatwe have a fragile circumstance in the import sector. I'm looking forimport prices not to rise quite as fast as others because the Japaneseautomobile industry seems so attuned to doing what they need to do onthe wage and price front in order to remain competitive, and I don'tthink we're going to see price increases there. And it doesn't seemto me that we're going to have much chance to lower our imports withour staff's projected real GNP path.So, I think we do run some risks that the first and secondquarters could cumulate to a lower level of output than we'reforecasting. And if that happens, I don't know what's going to turnit around. If we get off to a weak start, I don't know what will liftus up because it seems to me that the pattern of consumer spending mayworsen as fast as we get any export side improvement. I think therewill be export side improvement, but I think it's going to be veryslow and it's going to come only to industries that are very attunedto keeping costs low. Also, of course, if we end up with a lowergrowth than estimated, then we're not going to get quite as good agovernment budget outcome. If we achieve 3 to 4 percent real GNPgrowth, government spending as a percent of GNP has a chance to take anoteworthy downturn. I'm kind of uneasy but, like many of you, I-49-12/15-16/86share the priority of maintaining stable prices, and I guess I'mwilling to run a little risk here in order to achieve price levelstability. But I think we have to be aware of how vulnerable we maybe and we have to be ready for some unexpected events. It may notcome out just like the forecast.MR. KICHLINE. Mr. Chairman, the answer to this questionabout energy is essentially that in 1986 energy prices are decliningat 18 percent. In our estimate they have a weight of about 10 or 11percent, so the energy sector depresses the consumer price index byabout 1-3/4 percentage points this year. Next year our guesstimate isthat energy prices will be up 6 percent, so they would add 0.6 of apercentage point. So a major part of the swing is the energy sector.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that's only assuming [an oil price] of$16; if it went to $18 it would be more.MR. KICHLINE. That's correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you get that kind of a swing in energyisn't the implication, when you're talking about the consumer priceindex, that you must have other prices going lower relative to that?MR. KICHLINE. We have one other element that's importanthere: food. And it has a big weight, something like 18 to 20 percent.This year we're estimating food price increases of about 4 percent andnext year 2 percent. So that is a major swing the other way. Theother prices that we have in there don't change a great deal from oneyear to the next; it's not much of an acceleration.MR. ANGELL. And food prices could be even lower than thatgiven the fact that the red meat industry has the highest profitmargins it has had for many, many years and given the fact that we hadweather that adversely affected poultry prices. So we do have somepossibilities for food being better and we have an underlying wagestructure change in the service sector that's rather noticeable fornext year compared to this year.MR. JOHNSON. Service sector inflation is continuing todecelerate, I think, sort of gradually.MR. KICHLINE. Yes. We have something like 5-1/2 percent in1986 and our number [for 1987] is a little under 5 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else want to say anything? Let meask a question. If the nominal GNP were higher than you're projectingwould you think that it's more likely to appear in prices or in realGNP? Before you answer that, I know what the models show: that theprices will show up in 1990 and the real will show up right away. Iguess I'm really asking where the risks are and how confident you feelabout this inflation forecast.MR. KICHLINE. Well, let me answer that in a less direct waythan you might like. In looking at 1987, I think the risks are thatin the first half the economy will turn out to be weaker rather thanstronger. We can't identify how much spending is being acceleratedbut I think we probably underestimated it. I wouldn't be surprised tosee a number in the fourth quarter that's greater than what we have12/15-16/86built in; and if that happens I might also look for a weaker firstquarter and first half. Beyond that, I tend to think that we may runwith stronger GNP rather than weaker as we get into the latter half ofthe year. On the price side I think there's a good bet that verylittle will happen in the near term. But if we're wrong at thispoint--again looking out--consistent with my view on real GNP I mightbe adding a few tenths to the inflation side rather than taking away.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And you're projecting, essentially, a fewtenths per month average increase in the consumer price index with oilprices tilted slightly higher?MR. KICHLINE. And food prices slightly lower.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the food price tilt--you've only got a2 percent difference and maybe it should be bigger. It probably willbe, but I--MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that if the price pattern isstronger we will then get more desire to hold inventories and theeconomy could turn out to be stronger than the staff estimates.MR. TRUMAN. Well, there's another factor too. To theextent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your argument is that they go together?MR. TRUMAN. There has been a lot of discussion about importprices and I share the skepticism, both ways, that has been expressedon that. But to the extent that you get import prices moving morerapidly you would then have a direct impact in terms of statisticalaggregate demand, because real GNP presumably would also accelerate inthe process of import substitution that Governor Heller spoke of. Sothere is a direct link there even with the [unintelligible] ofinventory.MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. TRUMAN. Moving both at the same time is built in thisfour-quarter time period--MR. ANGELL. It just seems to me, Ted, that we do have quiteample capacity at a lot of these manufacturers in basic industry areasworldwide. The evidence seems to point to increased determination tobe competitive by one means or another, whether it's by subsidy orsome other event. And I tend to feel that the world prices arecontinuing on a moderate plane. But much of it would be--MR. TRUMAN. Well, [unintelligible] you're right about howthe rest of the world is behaving. Your words about the rest of theworld suggested an even soggier picture; that too could affect thebase prices and then you don't have the given exchange rate change.Whatever you want to assume about [unintelligible] could be less--MR. ANGELL. But it might not be so bad for us to go back to4 percent CPI and get a little stimulus in here and then have to goback when M1 starts behaving well and tighten up interest rates--runthem up 150 basis points. Maybe that's not too bad; I don't know.12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Mr. Black raised an interestingquestion earlier about whether we should have an inflation target,more explicitly. It's a big subject. It's a nice question on how wecan get the interest rate down. Maybe we ought to reserve a littletime next meeting for being a little more explicit in our discussionabout what we really are satisfied with and what priority to give it.Meanwhile, we will turn to Mr. Kohn and then go to coffee.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Given what you were talking about earlierregarding the various models for Ml and given the relative stabilityof interest rates--in fact there has been a very faint increase of aninsignificant amount, but it has been stable for quite a long time--why are you still showing a 12 percent rate of increase in Ml? Arethe lags that long?MR. KOHN. Yes, and especially when the offering--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How long has it been since short-termrates--MR. KOHN. Well, August was the last discount rate cut, so--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that's about the last time short-termrates went down.MR. KOHN. Now, if the offering rates were to adjust morepromptly--. But they've been edging down very slowly. So we havevery narrow opportunity costs, yet we continue to see huge growth inthose--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't had a substantial increase inshort-term market rates, since when--September?MR. ANGELL. Four months.MR. KOHN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And you're saying that the lag is morethan six months?MR. KOHN. Well, the total lag would be more than six months.The models probably were projecting a bit more of a slowdown over thelast couple of months than we actually had.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wonder what they are projecting for thefirst quarter?MR. KOHN. For the first quarter they are projecting anywherefrom 11 to 14 percent, or 10 to 14 percent on this November-to-Marchbasis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What would they project for the secondquarter, assuming unchanged interest rates?12/15-16/86MR. KOHN. They would project a first quarter of 13 percentand a second quarter of 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even then they don't get down to the[growth rate of] nominal GNP.MR. KOHN. No. They would get there by the second half ofthe year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A one-year lag?MR. KOHN. Well, it dissipates slowly in the model.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll go and have a short lag for coffee.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, after half of an afternoon and mostof the morning we have to get to a decision. Who would like to saysomething? We have a volunteer--Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I'll volunteer. After condensing all of this--what I hear and the way I feel--I don't feel strongly about changingmonetary policy from where we were before. I still think that a $300million borrowing target is about right. Although I favored [a tilt]last time, I feel a bit more strongly about it this time. I think wemight want some asymmetric language in the directive because of thepotential I've heard mentioned for a little more downside risks thistime, at least in the first half of the year. I think the inflationpicture looks a little less risky now than it did earlier, so we mightwant to change the mights and woulds in the directive to be asymmetrictoward potential ease rather than tightness at this point. But Idon't feel too strongly about it; I feel a little more strongly thanlast time, but it's just a suggestion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who would like to pitch in? Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. I would favor alternative B mainly because Ithink there are convincing signs of strength in the economy at thepresent time. But I share the view that the extent of the slowdownwhich we all seem to agree is likely to occur in the first quarter isuncertain and that, of course, should be noted in the policy statementas well. That could be done either in terms of asymmetric language orin some other more direct way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would also favor alternative B. I would notfavor asymmetrical language. To an extent, I think we've alreadyallowed for potential weakness in the first quarter; we've beenpursuing a very stimulative policy. I would be somewhat concerned ifwe didn't begin to see some slowing in Ml with stable interest rates.We are having to provide reserves at a very high rate to maintain thefunds rate at this 5-3/4 to 6 percent level. I don't know how longthose lags are either, but if we continue to see very rapid rates ofMl growth against the backdrop of stable interest rates, there may besome pickup in economic activity and I'd be concerned. So, I favoralternative B, with no asymmetry.12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. I would favor alternative B without asymmetry,too, because the market, in a context of the federal funds rate goingup, read a lot more--at least temporarily--into the last directivethat we published with asymmetrical language in it than we intended.For that reason I would favor symmetrical language.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe the forecast,although I'm somewhat nervous about it as I indicated earlier. Butuntil the downside risks really begin to emerge I would favor nochange in policy. Therefore, I would opt for alternative B as shownin the Bluebook. I would slightly favor an asymmetric directivesuggesting greater ease. Also, I would like to see us adopt thelanguage suggested in the Bluebook with respect to M1 and not continuewhat we have had--that we are continuing to look for a reduction inM1. I prefer the language that has been suggested by the staff.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. [I favor] alternative B with an evenhandeddirective. [Although] it's true that we expect some weakness in thefirst half, we also expect some increase in inflation. But I don'tthink we are going to know very much at all about the first part ofnext year before our February meeting. So, I think it would just betoo early to indicate to the marketplace, with an asymmetricaldirective, that we're concerned about a downturn.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. I, too, would favor alternative B, Mr. Chairman.I prefer the proposed substitute language because I don't think wehave any idea where Ml is going to be headed in the next two to threemonths and I don't think we'd react to it anyway, unless we weregetting similar signals from the other aggregates. I always tend tofavor a symmetrical posture and I think I would this time, [although]what Manley said certainly makes sense. I prefer "somewhat" over"slightly" because I think that indicates a little more willingness toreact in case something unexpected occurs. And for the same reason Iprefer the "woulds" over the "mights."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. I, too, prefer alternative B and I would advocatesymmetric language. It seems to me that even if we get some weaknessin the first half of next year, to some extent that is anticipated atthis point. We are expecting an overall satisfactory economicperformance and I don't think we would want to alter policy at thatjuncture if, essentially, the expected were happening. So it seems tome symmetric language would be appropriate and only if the economy orother measures, like the exchange rate, were deviating significantlyfrom the general path we expected would we want to react.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.-54-12/15-16/86MR. KEEHN. I'd be in favor of alternative B also, perhapsfor slightly different reasons. I would think that these minutesprobably are going to be released just before your testimony, andthat, therefore, these should be consistent with the last [directive].I would think that would be a slightly better environment--symmetricallanguage, without suggesting any change to the market--as you go intoyour testimony.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. "B" and symmetric.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get to the heart of the matter. Mr.Angell.MR. ANGELL. "B" and asymmetric. If we use symmetriclanguage, I prefer "would" and "somewhat" to "might" and "slightly."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want to be asymmetric?MR. ANGELL. I would like to be asymmetric because it seemsto me that when the minutes are released they should be the bestreflection we can provide at this time as to the general outlook. Andasymmetric is a better reflection of what I heard around the tablethan symmetric.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. "B" and symmetric.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I clearly want "B". I get confusedon the symmetries and asymmetries here, though. In listening to theconversation, I think we might want to keep the language symmetrical;but even if the language were symmetrical I don't think that wouldnecessarily preclude some easing--to go back to two months ago--ifthings really got "oozy." But I think the point about having thelanguage symmetrical in the context of the testimony is a good point.MR. JOHNSON. That's a good point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. "B" and symmetrical.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Well, based on my views of the economy, I shouldbe voting for "A," but in the spirit of Christmas I will go with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've got to break this pattern sometime!MS. SEGER. I will go with "B," but I would like asymmetriclanguage allowing for some lesser reserve restraint should all heckbreak loose.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Heller you're last in line.12/15-16/86MR. HELLER. Can't avoid it anymore. I also favoralternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "C" just for--MR. JOHNSON. If Henry were here today--MR. HELLER. Taking Henry Wallich's spot, I would want "C."But I think I'll go with the "B". And while I would not favorasymmetrical language, I agree that we should shade it in anasymmetrical fashion if it comes to that point. So I am taking Mr.Corrigan's amendments to Mr. Johnson's proposition.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have unanimity for "B." Beforewe get to symmetries and asymmetries, let me see what that means. I'mhappy with the language. We certainly would say "maintain theexisting degree of restraint. This action is expected to beconsistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from November toMarch at..." Well, I guess we have a choice: we can say about 7percent; we can say 6 to 7 percent; or I suppose we could say 6 to 8percent. What's your choice?MS. SEGER. How about "about 7 percent"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is "about 7 percent" all right withpeople? "Respectively" is not needed if we say "at an annual rate ofabout 7 percent." I don't know what you want to do about this Mlstatement. It seems to me a bit vacuous to say the outlook for M1remains subject to a great deal of uncertainty.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. However accurate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. However accurate. It seems to me betterthat something be said in the [policy record] text rather than in thedirective. That's--MR. HELLER. But it would set the stage a bit for theFebruary testimony.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no objection to saying it at greatlength in the policy record or whatever we call it. This is anoperational directive.MR. BLACK. Well, you could say "in view--"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a matter of taste. It just soundsodd to me to say in an operational directive that we have greatuncertainty about Ml.MR. MORRIS. Take the sentence out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's one thing to do: just leaveit out. Or we could just say "growth in Ml will continue to be judgedin the light of--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's good, yes.SPEAKER(?). I think that's the one.12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say "monitor" instead of "judge."MR. HELLER. Sure.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Now you're getting into majorchanges here!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to me a slightly more--I don'tknow--MR. ANGELL. "Viewed" makes a lot of sense.MR. HELLER. [Unintelligible.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Viewed" or "appraised"?MS. SEGER. "Fretted over"! How's that?MR. ANGELL. "Appraised" works pretty well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Appraised in the light of the behavior ofM2 and the other factors mentioned below." Isn't that a little bettermaybe? Then we get to symmetric or asymmetric. Let me try[unintelligible] greater support for the symmetric one. I'm not sureI understand this comment about being released before the testimonyand being symmetric. What difference does that make?MR. GUFFEY. Because that's what we had this past time. Inother words, it's consistent with what we had in the last--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why is consistency a virtue in this case?MR. JOHNSON. I think it all depends on what the economy isdoing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Precisely. I think it will look good ifthe economy is a little soft or--MR. KEEHN. I suggested it because, as Frank said, the marketoverread what we said the last time. It seems to me there could be anoverreading at this point. [With no change] you would go into thetestimony without that clouding the comments.MR. ANGELL. But on the other hand--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If the economy is weaker in such away that the asymmetry was operational, it seems to me this languagewould be operational anyway. That's the point I was thinking of.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I agree that if the economy were weakthis does reflect a little substance as to how quickly we would move.It certainly is not a [big] difference. If it turns out that we havemoved by the time this is released, we'll look better if it's a littleasymmetric.MR. PARRY. That's right.12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we haven't, I am not sure it makes alot of difference. But I--MR. PARRY. Well, the questions could get a little harder atthat point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm a little bothered--I don't want to betoo bothered--but if, in substance, we feel we want to be a littleasymmetric I'm not sure I see any compelling reason not to say thatif, in fact, we feel that way.MR. ANGELL. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If everybody's right about thelikelihood that the fourth quarter is strong--and we're not going toknow a lot about the first quarter by the time of your testimony--whatwas going through my head is that if we have an asymmetrical directivebut have decided not to use the asymmetry, then the questions areharder, I think. On the other hand, if circumstances are such that wedecide we want to ease a bit, nothing here would prevent us from doingthat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. While I think it's certainly true thatnothing will have prevented us from doing it, I think this differenceis not enormous. It may just come down to a question that dependsupon substantive views. If we really think the [likely direction ofpolicy] is significantly tilted I would think on general principlethat we ought to say something in the interest of truth; and if it'snot that clear then--MR. BLACK. What I heard was a feeling of uncertainty, Mr.Chairman, tilted a little in the way you say. But if uncertainty isthe predominant feeling then the symmetrical language makes a littlemore sense to me because we could be wrong in either direction.MR. ANGELL. But I think what we've written here--MR. JOHNSON. I thought the tone was we could be wrong morein one direction than the other.MR. BLACK. Yes, I agree with that; and I was on that side.But I don't say that with a great deal of confidence and I don't thinkany of us does.MR. ANGELL. I only remember one person--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One thing that hasn't been mentioned--solet me just mention it for the record--is that in terms of flexibilityof action I think the performance of the dollar makes it easier toease slightly if otherwise we wanted to than if the dollar was notbehaving. Now, I'm not saying that dictates any action; I don't thinkit does. But I think we ought to reflect that properly someplace inthe record, though not with too much emphasis. It could easilychange, obviously, in many ways. But at the moment it is onedifficulty that is removed in making [an easing move] if we wanted todo so, as I say, for other reasons. But I don't want to say this wastoo big a deal. I would have some slight tendency, as I say, towards-58-12/15-16/86easing language if we feel that way. We have used asymmetric languagelots of times to make this--MR. MELZER. In connection with the dollar, could I ask aquestion? You may choose to answer [or not]. If the Germans were tocut their discount rate tomorrow would it necessarily follow, in aneconomic sense, that we should leap to match that? In other words,you could make the argument that, standing alone, that might be asalutary action over time to address the trade imbalance. I don'tknow whether that's something that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll just give you my own reaction.I don't think we need to talk about it theoretically because I wouldbe very surprised if Germany reduced their discount rate any timeduring this relevant period. I would say I don't see any need to, inyour terms, "leap." If, in fact, the result was a significantstrengthening in the dollar then I would think that might become apositive factor weighing in the balance toward some easing.MR. ANGELL. Because that would take the dollar quite a waysfrom the staff forecast and might have some implications.MR. HELLER. It would tilt our foreign trade balance thewrong way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't put quite the same weight onthe staff forecast. It might move it in the direction that wascounterproductive over time.MR. JOHNSON. I think that would depend on how the domesticeconomy was performing--whether it was really starting to show somesigns of picking up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All I'm saying is that it would put weightin that direction if the dollar actually moved. It may not offsetother things if it [unintelligible] but that's my own view on it.MR. GUFFEY. But would you be easing policy through the Deskor would you be considering a discount rate decrease under thosecircumstances?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Subsidiary questions. Well, you know thisis not a federal case. Gee, we've got a whole hour that we can--MR. BLACK. We can make a federal case out of it.MR. MORRIS. Can we spend an hour talking about symmetry?MR. BLACK. That would be making it a federal case!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me write it down here. It took mesome time to figure out how to spell it.MR. BOEHNE. We've had less--MR. JOHNSON. It seems like we can kill two birds with onestone with that. I don't think the implications are great one way orthe other but if some sort of asymmetry in the language would12/15-16/86represent our current feeling--and maybe I'm wrong interpreting itthat way--that we actually believe that the economy is going to showweakness, the timing [of the directive's publication] would beassociated with the actual event.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think a fair summary of the discussion--I'm not talking about the directive now--would be that there wassomewhat more emphasis on the risks of a shortfall in the early partof the year than the other. Presumably, the directive will getinterpreted in that light anyway, which [unintelligible] arguments.It's no big deal if we put asymmetry in here so long as that's in thebackground discussion. So I don't think this is a terribly greatissue: but we're pretty closely divided as to what to do.MR. HELLER. I'll certainly go along with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could fool around with the "slightlys"and "somewhats" too. We could have one "slightly" and the other"somewhat;" that would be a new way of doing it.MR. BLACK. And we can play with the "woulds" and "mights"too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's what we usually do.MR. BLACK. You've got three combinations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say "slightly greater reserverestraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would"--MR. BLACK. Oh, we could really have some fun indeed!MR. JOHNSON. I have a tough time telling the differencebetween "slightly" and "somewhat," but I guess just for variation--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I think it's easier to tellthe difference between that than it is between "might" and "would."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. After all of this, is there any sense insaying "slightly greater reserve restraint or somewhat lesser reserverestraint might"? Either "might" or "would"--MR. GUFFEY. [The press] would have a good story with this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think "slightly" is better.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I have a great compromise.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was an attempt at a compromise. Doyou have a better compromise?MR. JOHNSON. Yes: "slightly," "somewhat," and "would."VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think the "slightly greater" isnot really operational in a borrowing [unintelligible]. So what aboutleaving it "slightly greater, slightly lesser" and have the "would"apply to both? It's still symmetrical but "would" is a little morepurposeful than might.12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's clearly symmetrical. It's onlythe reservation in your mind that is in the first part of thesentence.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't have a strong feeling aboutthis. The two things I'm worried about are the testimony and theyear-end thing too. We are going to have crazy money markets here forthe next--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know, maybe I'm wrong, but thistestimony [issue] seems pretty irrelevant. In the testimony I'll saywhether we've changed policy or not.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But what I was thinking of is thatif events work in a direction that we would choose not to [move] andwe have an asymmetrical directive, then you have to answer questionsthat seem to me a little difficult such as "Why did you say you weregoing to change and you didn't?"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't say we were going to change; Isaid we might. In September we said we might tighten; in December wesaid we might ease.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't feel that strongly about iteither way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, neither do I. I only feel stronglythat we've got to reach a conclusion next time. And I would prefer aconclusion that satisfied the maximum number of people. Does itappeal to anybody apart from Governor Johnson to say "slightly greaterreserve restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would"?MR. ANGELL. I would much prefer to say "slightly greaterreserve restraint."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Could we just try it again? "Slightlygreater reserve restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would."MR. JOHNSON. Yes, that was my suggestion.MR. ANGELL. That's what I would do. I think that mostaccurately reflects the discussion. There was only one individualthat I recall who said [the economy] might be stronger and yet itdidn't appear that it would be strong enough to require some action.There were quite a few who said it could be weaker.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could really make it asymmetric byleaving out the possibility of [greater reserve restraint], but that'sprobably too asymmetric.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, even I wouldn't want that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, is that acceptable?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It is to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can I have a show of hands as to howacceptable "slightly greater or somewhat lesser would" is? There is12/15-16/86reluctance in some of those hands, but I see quite a few. You need anexpert to read that asymmetry.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, it's pretty--MR. HELLER. We should publish a guide to asymmetry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the [policy record] discussion I thinkwe can reflect the fact that there was more uncertainty on the downside and, given that, a little more possibility of easing.MR. ANGELL. It would be nice to have the economy performbetter than we expected. That would be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we keep the 4 to 8 percent [range forthe funds rate]. There's nothing else that appears. Does thatcapture things? It's: maintain; about 7 percent; growth in M1 willcontinue to be appraised in the light of the behavior of M2 and M3 andthe other factors cited below--which are the strength of the businessexpansion, developments in foreign exchange markets, progress againstinflation, etc. Okay? We will vote.MR.BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesGovernor Heller YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Melzer YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Seger YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The meeting is concluded.END OF MEETING-62-