Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 23, 1986A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 23, 1986, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.MrsMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellGuffeyHellerHornJohnsonMelzerMorrisRiceSegerWallichMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Bernard, Assistant SecretaryBradfield, General CounselOltman, Deputy General CounselKichline, EconomistTruman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, Ms. Munnell,Messrs. Prell and Siegman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account9/23/86Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director forMonetary and Financial Policy, Board of GovernorsMr. Simpson, Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMessrs. Broaddus, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scadding,Scheld, Thieke, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, San Francisco,Chicago, New York, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. Skaperdas, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserveof Cleveland-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofSeptember 23, 1986CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to approve the minutes. Do I havea motion to approve?MS. SEGER. I'll move it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll second it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Now we'll turn to Mr.Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The lesson is that we have too muchofficial discussion.MR. CROSS. I don't disagree with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. I was told by a knowledgeable source that thereason the dollar did not go down when we cut the discount rate wasthat the long rate did not go down with it and that the exchange rateis more sensitive to long rates than to short rates. Is that aplausible explanation to you?MR. CROSS. I would think that certainly it's a factor. Iwouldn't give it total weight but, obviously, much of the effect onthe dollar is in the investment instrument and there's certainly a lotof attention paid to the long-term rates. And it's well known byeverybody in the market that those long-term rates have not beendeclining with our discount rate cut. So, I think it is certainly afactor.MR. MORRIS. It does raise questions about our ability toinfluence the exchange rate at this particular juncture.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the long-term rate goes up because ofconcern about inflation, I wouldn't think it would help the exchangerate.MR. MORRIS. You wouldn't think so. On the surface we seemto have a perverse reaction. The domestic market is saying this isinflationary and the international markets have a different view. Butthis is the only concept that I've heard that has tied the twotogether. I don't know.MR. TRUMAN. President Morris, research done by people heredoes suggests that in econometric terms you get more of an explanationof the dollar's movement from real long-rate differentials, as theChairman commented, than short rates. But they don't explain verymuch of the total. So, although by themselves they seem to providemore [of the explanation] over the longer term than [do short rates],it's not decisive. It is one of the factors, but presumably not theonly one.9/23/86MR. WALLICH. But isn't the long-term prospect more durablethan the short-term prospect? I'm speaking now of half a year or twoyears?MR. TRUMAN. You get more of that, Governor Wallich. That'spresumably what you're trying to pick up with the so-calledeconometric exercises. But I don't think they are very useful inexplaining wiggles from discount rate changes. You need other things.MS. HORN. So much of the public discussion about theexchange rate seems to center on the mark and the yen and yet we focusfrom time to time on how little the dollar has moved with respect toother important currencies--those of Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and soforth. Is there any effort, nonpublic effort, being made with thesegovernments?MR. CROSS. Well, there's certainly an effort being made bythe Treasury and others to talk to the Taiwanese and Koreans on someof these trade issues and other matters. Of course, it cuts bothways. The Taiwanese currency, for example, went up with the dollarand back down with the dollar. So it hasn't affected the presentexchange rate very much either way. If you draw charts including moreof these [other countries] you'd have a higher movement in the chartsthan we typically see when we focus on industrial countries. But thepattern is quite similar.MR. TRUMAN. President Horn, there is a proposal by theTaiwanese to apply U.S. trade legislation in reverse. For countrieswith which they had big trade surpluses they would cut the tariffs onimports rather than seek a depreciation or appreciation of thecurrency. That has not had any effect; it's one manifestation of thiskind of pressure.MR. CROSS. There's certainly a lot of discussion underwaywith them to try to do something.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Taiwan strikes me as rather a specialcase. They have an enormous surplus, enormous reserves. Their bigsurpluses, fortunately anyway, are with the Germans and Japanese.MR. CROSS. Taiwan has the biggest surplus of any of these.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Current account surplus.MR. CROSS. By a long shot. And they also have very, veryhigh reserves. Korea is different.MR. TRUMAN. We don't regard Taiwan as a country[unintelligible] this large surplus, [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We ought to make it a 51st state if thatwould help!MS. SEGER. Did I hear you right that the Germans were onboth sides of the market within a fairly short period? Are theytrying to target the dollar-mark relationship?9/23/86MR. CROSS. I'm not sure I would read all that into it. Theyhave not intervened on the low side. They did intervene when thedollar rose to 2.10; it did jump up very suddenly and that occurred ata time when we were closed--at 5:00 or so in the morning here--andthey undoubtedly felt that they were taking a helpful step at thatpoint. A lot of the pressure on the other side has come from theother Europeans who feel stress and strain resulting from the strongDM. As the dollar is weakening against the DM, the DM is tending tostrengthen against all currencies, particularly the EMS currencies.And, as I said, they sold $4-1/2 billion worth of DM last week andthat begins to hurt them. So, they are the ones who have beenpressing, I suspect, for these understandings on the jointintervention--that efforts should be made in order to prevent afurther sliding of the dollar, not that we should let go. At leastthat's the way I interpret it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They get a lot of pressure within Europewhen the Germans don't reduce their interest rates; that is one way ofreading it. Nobody wants a revaluation within Europe so they weredriven to this intervention idea as a method of relieving pressurewithin Europe against the general background of concern about thedollar. But that's not what led to that particular decision.MR. JOHNSON. Is there any notion of what the Germans will dowith all these marks that are being sold? Will they just let themstay out there? It would be fundamental to their monetary policy.MR. CROSS. These are basically coming out as marks that arein Euromark holdings. They have not allowed the Europeans to build upmarks within the Bundesbank.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Better get some--MR. GUFFEY. Does that mean it's not inflationary the waythey're doing it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. IndirectlyMR. TRUMAN. Yes, indirectly.MR. CROSS. It has no [direct] effect.MR. TRUMAN. Monetary [effect].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somebody else in the market has to holdthem.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, somebody's got to be holding them.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but it doesn't have an effect on bankreserves within Germany.MR. CROSS. That's the only point I was trying to make.MR. JOHNSON. But if somebody else within the European--MR. CROSS. It doesn't affect the Bundesbank.9/23/86MR. HELLER. But Sam, the other Europeans are interveningmainly in deutschemarks and not in--MR. CROSS. Almost entirely. There has been very littledollar intervention by the other Europeans. There has been a little;the Spanish have been picking up a few dollars as they positionthemselves for entry to the EMS or one thing or another. Butbasically it has been overwhelmingly DM intervention and not dollarintervention.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As Sam mentioned, and I would justemphasize, there has been quite a pickup in the German economy after avery sluggish performance. Nobody knows how long it will last. Butat the moment their domestic demand is doing very well. That,together with fairly rapid monetary expansion, is why any ideas theyhad of reducing their discount rate have been turned off. From thestandpoint of results, if what we're interested in is growth in theGerman economy, the most recent performance has been good; althoughit's hard to know if it will carry them, at the moment it is good.MR. PARRY. Do we anticipate that that growth will continue?I noticed that the assumption about growth for the OECD countries hasa fairly sharp fall-off in the second quarter.MR. TRUMAN. Well, it's certainly yet to be known, but weanticipate the second quarter will continue at the rate the Chairmanhas expressed which, depending upon which numbers you use, is either 8or 14 percent at an annual rate. But on average, we don't see muchdifference from the trend that they've had over the past couple ofyears of something under 3 percent. If anything, we see some tailingoff as we get into 1987.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No questions?MS. SEGER. I have one: Why was it that we didn't know untilthe last day about this tremendous additional need for requiredreserves?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, under the system of contemporaneousreserve accounting we depend on reports and revisions during thereserve maintenance period. And sometimes we get sizable revisions.If there is a revision midway through the period we can cope with thatfairly well, but we are vulnerable to hearing something as late as thelast day. And we can even get a report after the period is over thatrequirements were materially different from what we thought they wereon the last day we had an opportunity to operate. I wouldn't say thata revision of this size on the last day is typical but it's notunheard of to get a pretty big revision very late in the period.MR. BLACK. But it has to be in the non M1-type depositsbecause you already know those required reserves.9/23/86MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think we're getting some changeseven in the M1-type.MR. BLACK. But aren't they based on deposits earlier in theperiod?MR. KOHN. The non-Ml reserves are based on earlier deposits,right. The M1 reserves, of course, are based on contemporaneousdeposits and that's where this large revision is.MR. BLACK. Yes, I said it backwards, I'm sorry.MR. STERNLIGHT. Only the M1-types of deposits--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other comments orquestions on that, we will return to Mr. Sternlight and the topic wecovered to some degree last month about operations in coupon issues.I'm sure we have all thought that through. I think what the issuecomes down to is whether we do it reasonably routinely two or threetimes a year, the way we've been doing it, or whether we do it when wethink there's some purpose in doing it.MR. RICE. Why don't we do both? Could we do it in bothcircumstances?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we can do it in both circumstances;we could do it routinely and also when there's some purpose.MR. RICE. That's the point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then we buy more longer-term securities.MR. RICE. Not necessarily.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is, necessarily, if literally you go inthat market routinely and also--MR. RICE. You'd go in the market more frequently but youwouldn't necessarily buy more.MR. ANGELL. But that also might mean that you would sell attimes when--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this question of selling arose lasttime. I don't know whether there's anything more to be said on that.The observed practice is that we don't sell.MR. ANGELL. It might have an announcement effect.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no doubt about that. That's whywe don't sell--because we expect an announcement effect.MR. BOEHNE. On this issue of liquidity, which is one of themain reasons for reducing the holdings of long-term securities: Thattable that Peter sent out shows that we have something like--this isnot an exact number--$90 billion in Treasury bills.MR. STERNLIGHT. Very close to $100 billion.9/23/86MR. BOEHNE. All right, close to $100 billion. Totalreserves in the entire System are around $50 billion, aren't they?MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.MR. BOEHNE. A good chunk of that $50 billion would be vaultcash, so actually the deposits at Federal Reserve Banks would probablybe what--$25 to $30 billion?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. Or something like that. So that means in termsof liquidity that we already have in our portfolio something likethree times the amount of total reserves on deposit at Federal ReserveBanks. Unless I'm missing something I don't see a liquidity issuehere.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the liquidity is very ample now. Idon't know if I'd draw that [conclusion] just from the comparison thatyou made, but there has been ample liquidity. And it seems to me thatliquidity has grown, even, with the policy of recent years. But wehave done a moderate proportion of our long-term provision [ofreserves] with occasional purchasing of coupon issues.MR. GUFFEY. If two or three large banks get into trouble andwe're providing reserves through the discount window, though, therecould be a liquidity problem even with these numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I don't think this [unintelligible].Now, we do have other constraints than that [unintelligible]. We lenddollars to--MR. STERNLIGHT. Twelve.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Twelve.MR. JOHNSON. If we run into a $90 billion problem we mightas well turn in our badge.MR. BOEHNE. We may not be routinely mopping up reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can turn in the badge but still handlethe problem.MR. BLACK. It does suggest, though, that if we get a chancewe ought to get rid of that collateral requirement on notes just incase.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That I think we can do. But I think it isright to say that one issue is the liquidity crisis and the other iswhether we see any purpose in buying coupons.MS. HORN. I guess my view on this is that the folks in theTreasury Department ought to be in the debt management business andthat some sort of neutral stand by the Federal Reserve is anappropriate one. Having said that, I think you could define policy asneutral if either we pursued a bills only approach or if we routinelywent in for preannounced, preagreed, purchases in the long-term area.9/23/86And since both long-term and short-term [securities] count ascollateral that doesn't help make the decision either. But those arethe two policies that I can define as neutral, if you will.MR. JOHNSON. If we could get the Treasury to stop extendingthe term structure of the debt, it seems that a neutral policy wouldbe to buy whatever they issue in the same proportion. But they keepextending the number of long bonds without a real rationale that I cantell.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You find a portfolio distribution you likeand the Treasury is maintaining a distribution that it likes. I haveno doubt of the volume this could involve should it never involvebuying, just rolling over what we have.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I guess that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I [unintelligible] this with it. We mightbuy in proportion to what their--MR. JOHNSON. In proportion to what their needs were, whichwould mean we would be in the market on a regular basis but for smallamounts.MR. RICE. It seems to me that it's a potentially useful toolthat we might not want to give up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not talking about giving it up; I'mtalking about--MR. RICE. You give it up if you don't use it every once in awhile.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's the question. That's whatthe issue comes down to.MR. RICE. I can imagine times--not often--when there mightbe a shortage of bills and we don't want to increase that shortage ofbills in the market and there may be some long-term securitiesavailable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no objection to buying long-termsecurities when there's a good reason for buying them. My question iswhether any particular purpose is served when there's no reason to buythem. I think you want to argue that this [routine buying] keeps themachinery oiled or something. That's the argument.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. A corollary argument to that is thatif you completely stop doing it except in extraordinary circumstances,that too involves an announcement effect. At some point you're goingto have to answer the question: Why aren't you buying long-termsecurities anymore?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no trouble answering that questionas to why we're not buying. If we wanted to adopt that policy wewould say we're not buying them anymore except when some purpose isserved in buying them.9/23/86MR. MORRIS. I think the idea that we control a long-termposition by not rolling over completely all of the maturing issues--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Certainly, that helps you.MR. MORRIS. Is that something that the Treasury would beupset about?MR. STERNLIGHT. They would not be bothered by our leaningmore toward the short-term option.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would do that if we're going to continuebuying. I would go very short and pretty soon.MR. RICE. Would buying smaller amounts have an announcementeffect?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd [unintelligible] if we buysmall amounts now, and even if we can, if we're going to do it at all.That is my impression.MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't see any significant announcementeffect from leaning toward the shorter options. I don't think[unintelligible].SPEAKER(?). No, no. From buying smaller amounts?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't mean that. From buyingsmaller amounts in the market when we buy.MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know how much "smaller" would be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't buy.MR. RICE. What's the average amount?MR. STERNLIGHT. In typical trips to the market recently ithas been something like $1 billion or $1-1/2 billion, in that kind ofrange. We only did $4 or $5 billion [unintelligible]. We couldcertainly buy a couple of billion.MR. RICE. You could certainly buy a couple of hundredmillion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can buy it if you [unintelligible].Even $1 or $1-1/2 billion isn't very much; it's pretty trivialconsidering the volumes in the Treasury market.MR. MORRIS. But you could generate that leeway very easilyby just failing to roll over part of our holdings.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No doubt you can protect the liquidityposition by going shorter on the rollovers.MR. MORRIS. If the Treasury doesn't object, it seems to methat would be the answer. You could have your cake and eat it too.9/23/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's no question you could dothat. That is kind of in between. It just leaves the question--.It's not like it's [unintelligible] every time we buy a coupon issue.I personally wonder why we're doing it. There is no other reason.The answer I get is: to keep the machinery oiled. I don't know whatthat means.MR. RICE. To keep people from being surprised.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you have a purpose, you want tosurprise.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that if we do not want to sell,and that presumably is the consensus, we ought not to buy as long-termas we've been buying. That would maintain more liquidity. If you cannever sell then there is merit in shortening the maturities that youdo buy.MR. MORRIS. But presumably we learn something about thefunctioning of the long-term market by seeing a response to ouroperations. I assume that's where Peter--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That, I think, is one argument.MR. MORRIS. It's not a matter of oiling the machinery; it'sreally having a test that we participate in to see how the machineryis working.SPEAKER(?) But in general the Treasury market is very broadand very deep. If you just keep--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to prolong this discussion oradd to it. Ordinarily, it's working just fine. There's a lot biggervolume going through the market every day than what we're doing. Wemight want to know how it's working at some point of strain orwhatever. Then I have no problem. I have no compunction about buyinglong-term securities when there's a purpose here.MR. JOHNSON. Have we bought coupons for a purpose at times?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not for a long time. Historically, yes,but not recently.MR. STERNLIGHT. I might point out that sometimes in thoseperiods of strain, we feel constraints--that we should not get in themarket because we don't want to be seen as interfering with themarket's own adjustment process.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's the concern that I have: Ifyou withdraw from the market completely, do you create a situationwhere you're so inhibited about going into the market that inprecisely the circumstance that you might want to go in you are justscared to death to do so because the announcement effect would bebigger then? I don't know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I will give you an example.Ordinarily, if we had a strong reason for going in, the announcementeffect might be welcomed. If we really thought the market was in a9/23/86panic, say, and we wanted to show some support in the market, we wouldwant an announcement effect. An announcement effect would have beenmore important in July. But taking the last few weeks, I don't knowwhether we had any particular reserve need which was suitable--MR. JOHNSON. I think we did.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we might have argued we were going tobuy anyway and with the long-term rates backing up and the new rate[unintelligible] it might have been quite reasonable to have boughtlong-term securities. Now, would we have been better off or worse offif we had decided in the last few weeks to do that against thebackground of a reserve need when we had no purpose--just a matter ofhaving been in there and only been in for periods of that sort.That's an arguable point.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just to take your example and makeit a little more pointed: My personal instinct is that if that verytouchy interval a week ago, last Thursday-Friday, also had been one ofthose intervals when the market in the normal course might haveexpected us to be doing something, I think it would have been easierto do something.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I'm saying: you could get inbetween cases of that sort. But we're so constrained now, we could[only] do it when we're supplying reserves permanently. Anyway, thechances of that arising coincident with a period of that sort areremote.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think they are that remoteat all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does anybody else want to express aview on this subject? If not, the issue having been raised we'dbetter arrive at some conclusion. One option is merely to do more orless what we have been doing, which doesn't exclude, obviously, doingit on special occasions and [leaning toward] the shorter [maturities]in refundings. The other option would be to [cut back] in our alreadypretty limited operation of being willing to do it--I don't hearanybody saying we never should do it or even that we should be allthat reluctant if there is a need or some positive rationale--butconfine ourselves as to when there is some positive rationale otherthan that we haven't done it for six months. These are the twochoices. Who prefers option one, continuing fairly routine [purchasesof coupons]? Most people prefer that so we'll continue that fairlyroutine--MR. JOHNSON. But we will go short on the refunds[unintelligible]? At what pace are we going to roll them over?MR. ANGELL. That's not [unintelligible] three years.MR. JOHNSON. We could thin out the market [unintelligible],depending on the pace that we--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it makes much difference inthe market because now they have allocated these securities especiallyto us anyway and we can--9/23/86MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, that's [unintelligible] in the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can just go to shortening, whichdoesn't affect the market at all.MR. JOHNSON. Okay.MR. STERNLIGHT. As to how short we would be, I don't know.On this last quarterly rollover when the Treasury was offering roughlyequal amounts of 3-year, 10-year, and 30-year issues, we did about 2/3in the short option and correspondingly small amounts in the twolonger options. I think leaving those longer options still smallerbut keeping some minimal contact with the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Why do you] say you're keeping contactwith [the market] if you're buying them directly from the Treasury andnever selling them?MR. ANGELL. Yes, I don't think they are being sold. I don'tthink there's any reason to be in the 10- and 30-year issues if you'renot going to be able to sell.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, having some small holding of them canbe useful in our lending securities program. I wouldn't make a wholelot of that, but after Drysdale it was useful to have securities thatwe could lend just to help sort out delivery problems in the markets.MR. HELLER. Where do you plan to be, roughly, if you talkabout the percentage of total portfolio? Now we have 48 percent,which is about a record high. Two or three years from now where doyou think we'll be?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the proportion of bills willcontinue to creep up.MR. HELLER. To 55, 60 percent?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it will continue to creep up,continuing what we are doing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In bills. Coupons would presumably getshorter?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, the coupon holdings would tend toshorten on this rollover--MR. HELLER. So you're taking about every two years or soanother 5 percentage points up there. Is that roughly the result of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon whether the money supplycontinues to expand at the rate of recent years. The marginalincrease will rise with more bills, but as he said--MR. HELLER. Is it by a large rise or--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon9/23/86MR. HELLER. It depends on the rollover, the runoff of thecoupons.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, because they'll be rolled over intocoupons.MR. HELLER. They're going to the short end.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Short coupons, but they'll still be incoupons.MR. GUFFEY. Traditionally, or within the last few years,we've done a couple of bill purchases in providing longer-termreserves and the market expects that.MR. STERNLIGHT. [You mean] a couple of coupon purchases.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, coupon purchases. Does this in any wayalter that policy? Would we not do a coupon pass if--MR. STERNLIGHT. I understood the consensus to be to continuewhat we've been doing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The consensus was to continue to do it insmall amounts.MR. GUFFEY. And you'd just shorten it up by not taking asmuch on new issues then?MR. STERNLIGHT. By not taking as much of the long options.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, on new issues.MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. The inventory pattern that you have for the thirdand fourth quarters I know is related to autos, but what indication doyou have that that disinvestment in the third quarter is likely tocome about--particularly in light of the numbers that we have forinventories in July?MR. KICHLINE. What we have in terms of nonfarm inventoriesin the third quarter is a runoff of nearly $12 billion, annual rate,in constant dollar terms. We have nonfarm inventories excluding autosrising about $9 billion. So the story is really very much an autostory, with a decline in auto stocks of about $21 billion in realterms in the third quarter. The numbers in the report in July were alittle curious in the auto sector. They run counter to this and, asfar as we know, the folks at BEA have other information they use inputting the numbers together. As you know, inventories are a wildcard in all of this and I don't have any particular faith in a givennumber. But we do know what's happening to measures of auto stocks.And I would say that we have this forecast of a $21 billion runoff andan increase of $12 billion in the next quarter within a few billion.9/23/86I think it's safe to say autos are largely driving that. Outside ofautos we have small increases.MR. PARRY. The other issue is on net exports. You haveroughly a $17 billion growth in the second half coming from netexports. Going to the July data again, the fact that you get animprovement of roughly $7 billion in the third quarter looks a littlesuspect at this point.MR. KICHLINE. I have a colleague who has answered many ofthese questions.MR. TRUMAN. I agree that the July data were disturbing. Infact, as far as the trade balance itself, the trade deficit in thethird quarter would be larger than in the second quarter, which wasessentially unchanged from the first. In terms of GNP accounts,however, two things are operating. One is the deflation; prices arerising for imports and in some sense that's taking back, so quantitiesare not rising as rapidly. On the other hand, when you're goingthrough the trade numbers to the GNP accounts, there's about $3billion at an annual rate that's accounted for by gold. Gold comesout of trade, both imports and exports, when it goes into GNPaccounts. The negative swing is because of what's been going on ingold trade going from second quarter to third quarter; that swingisn't reflected at all in the GNP accounts. So I think it's fair tosay that while we don't know what the revised figures will be whenthey come out at the end of this month they could well show worsenumbers for July than the preliminary estimates. Our sense is thatthose are odd numbers and we are assuming they will be offset in partby August and September in the trade balance.MR. PARRY. I get the impression that your level ofconfidence is not the highest on that one.MR. TRUMAN. I think Jim summarized our sense of a lack ofconfirming evidence.MR. PARRY. Okay.MR. TRUMAN. On the other hand, to the extent that otheraspects of the forecast are beginning to fall into place we had hopedthat this one, too, would turn--MR. PARRY. The improvement in, let's say, the period fromthe fourth quarter of '86 to the fourth quarter of '87 certainly looksreasonable; it's that pattern in the last half.MS. HORN. Staying on the trade number for just a moment: Iffor some reason that projected trade number didn't come to pass, theremight be implications for the inflation number. If you get morestimulus from the deficit than you're projecting and less from thetrade accounts, then that might cause you to revise your inflationnumber. Inflation would be worse then.MR. KICHLINE. Yes, to some extent our view is that some ofthe inflation coming from the dollar is a matter of timing. We'vebeen seeing those price increases and it's a question of how they feedthrough. Obviously, we have weaker domestic markets. Out of the-13-9/23/86forecast of 3 percent real growth next year, a little over a third ofthat comes from net exports. So if you took away those exports thedirect effect is rather large; and you can clearly have indirecteffects, feedback effects, in domestic income. So, if you were toassume no improvement whatsoever, I think you're talking about apretty sick domestic economy unless we have other things wrong.MR. PARRY. Yes, it's other things equal.MR. BLACK. Jim, do you have a CPI figure for all items otherthan food and energy?MR. KICHLINE. It's up 3/10ths.MR. BLACK. 3/10ths. Thanks.MR. FORRESTAL. Jim, can I ask about the unemploymentnumbers? I would have thought that the unemployment numbers would bea bit lower than they are in your forecast for those two quarters.Are those [unintelligible]? Or are the numbers about right, do youthink?MR. KICHLINE. Well, I don't think I'd make big changes. Wehave a number for August of 6.8 percent and an average of 6.9 percentin the third quarter. If anything, I might change it a tenth, clearlyon the downside. I think that's what you're asking.MR. FORRESTAL. Yes.MR. KICHLINE. The question as we go into the fourth quarteris whether we're going to continue to see that sort of improvement ina major way. We have assumed that we'll continue to have employmentgrowth but at a somewhat lesser rate than we've been seeing recently.So, we have the unemployment rate drifting down only a tenth on aquarterly average. If that's wrong, and given what we know now, I'dbend in the direction of knocking another tenth or two off. I don'tfeel particularly uncomfortable [with our forecast] but I think theweighting of the evidence would be in the direction of a lower ratherthan a higher rate.MR. BOYKIN. Jim, one question on your forecast. Thepositives are fairly heavily weighted on the improvement in exports.As I think you know, our folks have been doing a little researchtrying to figure out what has really happened to the dollar and ourjudgment seems to be that it has declined somewhere between 7 to 9percent as opposed to 25 to 30 percent. If that should be true, thatwould tend to postpone this improvement. I would just raise--MR. TRUMAN. But, President Boykin, we don't say this is ourforecast for the weighted average dollar and put that into an equationand ignore the rest of the world. So, just because we use that as anindicator of where the dollar is going does not mean that we haveignored in this forecast the fact that the Taiwanese or the Korean[currencies] have not been depreciating appreciably against thedollar. We have gone back and looked at this more carefully over thelast several months and, in fact, I am much more comfortable than Iwas before--at least to the extent that history can be any guide inthese matters--that in the forecast we have adequately taken account9/23/86of the lack of depreciation against the fixed [exchange rates ofcertain countries] in the judgmental adjustments that we have beenmaking. Before, when we went back and looked at it, the wholescientific evidence suggested that, if anything, we were going too farin the direction of slowing down [the adjustment] for that reasonrather than not far enough. So there is something in the forecastthat takes account of the lack of depreciation against thosecurrencies explicitly, and it is based upon scientific evidence aswell, if you want to call it that. Now, we have a big problem interms of how we forecast what's going to happen to those currencies.Basically what we have assumed is that they would maintain their valuein real terms against the U.S. dollar. So there would be no net realappreciation or depreciation versus those currencies, on balance.Given the fact that we're dealing with some countries who have rathersevere debt problems, that may or may not be appropriate. On theother hand, we have enough trouble doing the forecasting we do. Sothere is an explicit assumption, essentially, about both the behaviorof those currencies and economies and an assumption about the courseof their exchange rates in our forecast [unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. You have marked down some the G-10 countries'growth?MR. TRUMAN. A touch, yes.MR. JOHNSON. I haven't read the export numbers carefullyenough to know: Have they been changed much since the earlierforecast?MR. TRUMAN. No, this forecast basically is the same as theprevious one.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, so something had to give there. Thegrowth abroad slowed. Is that made up in what has happened to theexchange rate since that time?MR. TRUMAN. No, the exchange rate forecast for once didn'tchange at all just because we have the growth down by a tenth, or twotenths if you combine the two years. This would tend to give us alittle more depressing effects on exports, as you suggested.Basically, the order of magnitude would be about the same as the lasttime. As for the impact on the overall forecast, on balance, I thinkwe took a little out of the 6-quarter change from where we were lasttime.MR. PARRY. I'd like to ask a question about the inflationrate that you have, the implicit deflator, and the dollar. The verysmall increase in inflation in the fourth quarter we talked about lasttime and you mentioned that it's primarily the fact that the deflatoron imports is rising. That's part of the story in the sense that insubsequent periods one would expect that as profit margins get narrowthe [price increases] would get passed on in terms of higher domesticprices on goods that use imports as raw materials, and also in termsof domestic goods that compete with imports. How do you explicitlycapture that? Do you do deflators by sector or is this a judgment?MR. KICHLINE. No, we do it by sector. And where that showsup explicitly is in private domestic final purchases. So you look at-15-9/23/86consumption, you look at investment. For example, we have that total,excluding food and energy, rising next year at a rate close to 4percent. So that's sort of an explicit recognition that these importsprices are feeding through into final goods prices.MR. PARRY. So that would be adding how much--roughly apercent?MR. KICHLINE. I think we have something like 3/4 of apercent or 0.8 percent.MR. MELZER. Jim, how would you view the declines in theconsumer confidence indexes? Would you attach much significance tothat, what do you think the causes might have been, and so forth?MR. KICHLINE. I have a hard time reading some of those.They have bounced around. They're still at a high level but clearlythey are not as high as they were a number of years back. Some ofthese reports--depending on whether you look at the Michigan or theConference Board surveys--tend to be sort of "things are good now butthey're going to get worse." In the Michigan case what often happens,and what I think was happening in August, is that it reflects anincrease in inflationary expectations that's very highly correlatedwith food prices. Given the past behavior [of the index], wheneverfood prices go up Michigan seems to pick up the view that thingsaren't quite as good as they once were. So, at the moment I wouldn'tread a lot into the declines, given that the levels are still high andgiven what we see going on in terms of actual expenditure patterns--that consumers have been quite happy to spend.MR. MORRIS. The Michigan people also say that the index isvery sensitive to changes in interest rates, particularly the mortgagerate, and the backing up of the mortgage rate may be [a factor].MR. KICHLINE. Yes.MR. MORRIS. Jim, if I could ask you: You mentioned thatnondefense capital goods orders were down somewhat. What about totaldurable goods orders?MR. KICHLINE. The total was little changed. It was up 3.4percent in July and down 2.6 percent in August. There was a big dropin defense orders.MR. PARRY. Was there a revision in the--MR. KICHLINE. No, the revisions, I think, are very small.On nondefense capital goods alone it's virtually unchanged. That wasup 3.7 percent in July and down 2.8 percent in August.MR. MORRIS. So we didn't get any confirmation of theemployment numbers in manufacturing?MR. KICHLINE. No. Part of what's going on, though, is thatthe aircraft area has been extremely volatile. It was up very sharplyin July and went down in August. Nondefense capital goods ordersexcluding that aircraft component are still down in August but thelevel is 3-1/2 percent above the second-quarter average. So I would9/23/86read that as something very helpful. The other development that isencouraging is that office and computing machinery orders rose again.They are now, as you know, at a low level; but they are 25 percentabove where they were in the second quarter. So there seems to be alittle life coming back in that high-tech area.MR. MORRIS. Yes. I was told by one computer company thatthey are selling a lot to Korea and Taiwan, so maybe we'll--MR. PARRY. Do I remember correctly that you said most ofthose major Boeing and McDonnell-Douglas orders were not booked yet?MR. PRELL. Yes, that is true.MR. PARRY. So there could be even greater strength comingalong.MR. PRELL. They indicated in their release this morning thatthose orders still aren't showing up in these latest figures.MR. PARRY. And they're big orders.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any general comments on theeconomic outlook?MR. WALLICH. Could I say something about how difficult itseems to be at this stage to [look] forward? It's difficult for me to[elaborate on] that, but I just want to make that clear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, our view of the near-term outlookis still pretty close to that of the staff. This upward revision ingrowth of GNP in the second half makes sense to us in view of thedomestic automobile sales incentives and what appears to be someimprovement in the manufacturing sector in general. I think thelonger-term prospects are a little harder to call. We're stillgenerally optimistic and we think the staff is perhaps about right inprojecting a moderate 3 percent rate of growth for next year. Infact, we tend to think that consumer spending and probably businessfixed investment might be a tad stronger. One reason is that we don'tthink there will be quite as much of an increase in the cost ofcapital and, therefore, that the new tax law will be less damaging tocapital spending than some economists believe--if you take intoconsideration that the top corporate tax rate has come down and alsoconsider what has happened to individual income tax rates of dividendrecipients.But all of this depends, I think, on interest rates andinflation remaining relatively stable. And I think the risks haveincreased that such might not be the case on both fronts. Inparticular, the prospect for progress in reducing the federal deficitlooks a lot less favorable now. I think the financial markets sensethis and that's one of the reasons we had the recent backup ininterest rates, which probably affected the decline in the stockprices. The markets also are clearly more concerned now about thepossibility of a revival of inflation and neither of these kinds of[developments] is good for the markets and neither is good for the-17-9/23/86economy. I hope we'll do everything we can to keep these things fromgaining momentum.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Conditions in our part of the Midwest, I think,are very much unchanged. The trends that have been in place most ofthe year continue at about the same level. But I continue to bestruck by this incredible dichotomy between the good sectors of theeconomy and those that are relatively weak. There is nothing newabout that but that dichotomy certainly continues. I think theautomotive sector, which Jim referred to, is rather phenomenal. Herewe have had the third year in a row of auto sales over 10 million,which I think is a pretty good record, yet even now these incentiveprograms just have a phenomenal effect because sales have literallytaken off. Construction activity in the Midwest continues at a prettyhigh level. Residential construction throughout the District isreally quite strong; that's particularly true in Illinois where thenumbers are running well over the national average. We are perhapsslightly different from what Jim said on the commercial side; we arestabilizing in our commercial construction but nonetheless stabilizingat what seems like a pretty high level.On the negative side, the heavy manufacturing news continuesto be pretty somber. There is no particular improvement. More andmore companies are continuing to shift their production offshore totake advantage of lower wage rates. They admit that they are late indoing it but nonetheless see an opportunity to take advantage of thattrend. On the tax bill, those that I talk to on the heavymanufacturing side are pretty glum as to the near-term effects thatthe bill, assuming it gets passed, is likely to have. Ouragricultural directors report that we have had, really, a perfectgrowing season and we're bracing for record production; the storiesone hears about the storage problems and what they're going to do withall this are really quite phenomenal.On the inflation side, I think the general outlook continuesto be favorable but there are just those few worrisome signs there.As I suggested, housing starts in the Midwest are pretty strong. Insome suburban Chicago areas we're having significant prices increases--15 to 20 percent in the first six months of this year. It's a very,very, strong housing market and the prices are going up. Weanticipate that apartment rents will be up 5 to 10 percent in theChicago area. And, I think everybody expects that the prices ofimports, particularly cars, are going to begin to go up. Offsettingthat, the labor news, as Jim suggests, continues to be good. Three-year contracts are prevalent and annual costs are very moderate. Italked to somebody last week who settled a three-year contract withcosts over the three-year period of 1 to 1-1/2 percent. And thecompanies are getting very, very significant work rule changes--that'sthe big push now, of course. On the pricing side--perhaps not inservices, but certainly in manufacturing--there are pressures.As to the [national] outlook, certainly our outlook isconsistent with the staff forecast. But I agree with Governor Wallichthat it's a very, very hard time to call it. Everybody anticipatesthat we're going to see export activity pick up and that at some pointimports will be under some constraint; but these events are certainly-18-9/23/86getting to be long overdue. Therefore, I think it is a tough call tojudge just how strong the underlying strength of the economy reallyis. Perhaps this is one of those times that we just have to standback and see how things come in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. The economic situation in the Twelfth District isbasically unchanged from the last meeting, but I think there are a fewmore signs of strength in the District. In August, growth ofemployment in California was very rapid. And the July-over-Julyincrease for the entire District, which of course includes 9 states,was a full percentage point greater than the national average, withonly Alaska and Oregon being under that average. Even in a few of theproblems areas of the District we see some glimmers of greaterstrength. The mining industry got a boost recently in Utah with thesigning of a 4-year contract by Kennecott with the mining union thatis going to result in a resumption of production and will probably addabout 2,000 workers between now and the middle of next year. Thelumber industry is doing quite well at the present time. It has beenhelped by several developments, including strong domestic demand forlumber and a 22 percent increase in exports in the first half.There's also an industry strike in British Columbia which is affectingthe Pacific Coast lumber industry positively. And there is anexpectation, in the industry at least, that the International TradeCommission is going to find that British Columbia has subsidized soft-wood exports and that that's going to accrue to our benefit. On thenegative side, as far as the District is concerned, most of the talkcenters around the tax bill and is basically in line with what SiKeehn mentioned.Our forecast is similar to that of the Board staff's with theexception that we don't have quite the same pattern for net exportsand inventories, particularly in the second half of 1986, and forinflation over the entire period. We agree that the trade account islikely to be an important source of growth in 1987 but we are not veryconfident that the turnaround will occur in the third quarter or thatwe'll get as much strength in the entire second half as indicated bythe Board's forecast. We looked at some data that we have for PacificCoast customs districts, which represent about 25 percent of alltrade. Those data have a lot of problems, including the fact thatthey are nominal--we don't have any deflators in them--but they doindicate that the trade balance has deteriorated consistently throughJuly. It appears as though that deterioration is a result of greaterimports from Canada, Mexico, and perhaps also the Pacific Basin mix.In the inventory area, we see more strength in the third quarter andperhaps a little less in the fourth. I must admit that thecontribution to growth of $25.8 billion in the fourth quarter in theBoard's forecast is quite a bit more than we have. Also, we do nothave such a sharp fall-off--going from 5.6 to 0.9 percent--in finalsales. So, there's quite a difference in pattern but we end up with areal GNP growth which is not that much different for the second half.Finally, I have a somewhat greater concern about inflation through1987 than is in the Board staff's forecast. We talked about that alittle in the discussion. I think there is a chance that we'll seemore of an effect in other sectors of the passthrough of the higherdollar cost of imports. I also wonder if the growth rate of theeconomy, averaging 3 percent between now and the end of 1987, would9/23/86enable producers to pass along larger price increases than areincorporated in the Board staff's forecast. As a result, ourinflation rates have a tendency to be running about a percentage pointhigher than those shown by the Board staff.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What happened in that Weyerhauser strike?Is it settled?MR. PARRY. We still don't know. It's mainly in BritishColumbia and that's why it seems to be accruing to the benefit of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Weyerhauser in British Columbia?MR. PARRY. The one domestically has been settled.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been settled?MR. PARRY. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On what terms?MR. PARRY. It was mainly rules. I don't know what it was onwages. is not nearly as optimistic asbecause it is apparently accruing very much to the benefit ofis not as much affected--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He didn't get a good settlement?MR. PARRY. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff's forecast is agood one. I expect, as they do, that the economy will pick up in thisquarter and in the fourth quarter. However, I can't help noting someareas of concern. The first is that the two areas of strength in theeconomy--consumption spending and single-family residentialconstruction--while likely to maintain their strength, will becontributing less to the economy. That is, their rate of growth willbe decelerating and residential construction in the single-family areawill be offset by what's happening in multifamily housingconstruction. And I'm mindful that the two components that we arerelying on to provide this pickup--that is, inventory accumulation andan improvement in the external accounts--are areas that in the pasthave proven difficult to forecast. As has been pointed out, we maynot see the degree of improvement in these components that we wouldhope for. Therefore, I would see the risks of the forecast on thedown side. I'm gratified, however, by the recent evidence ofimprovement in the economy, particularly in the employment area, andalso by the anecdotal evidence that has come in. There seems to be animproved sentiment in the business community as well. But I do seethe risks at this point on the down side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. The District continues to operate at a higherlevel of business activity than the nation as a whole. Just oneindicator of that is unemployment, which for the District as a whole-20-9/23/86has been running around 6 percent and around Philadelphia closer to 5percent. But we have noticed in the last couple of months that therate of change has slowed somewhat. That has not affected attitudes,however, which I think are generally upbeat because of the higherlevel. While people don't feel great about the future, they thinkit's pretty good.As I look at the national economy, I do think that thestatistics have improved a touch. I'm not sure how much I would makeof that but I think that is there. Largely because of the foreignsector, how the economy in fact will turn out is very tough to call.As a result, my convictions, and I sense the convictions of others, donot run very deep about the economic outlook. I think we see thismore dramatically in the financial markets, which seem to act onchanges in sentiment, more than on the goods side. There is thatlevel of uncertainly and lack of conviction as to where we're going.On the inflation side, I sense that there has been perhaps more than asubtle change--that the concern about inflation as expressed in thelong bond market, and to some extent in the commodities market, isthere. And I think the message there for those of us who makemonetary policy is that perhaps we have run into some resistance pointon what we can do. Trying to bring all that down to a bottom line, Iwould come out about where the staff is as far as numbers; but I wouldemphasize that there's not a whole lot of conviction that lies behindthose numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Looking first at the District, I think Icould say, Mr. Chairman, that conditions in the Southeast reflectpretty much the imbalances that we see in the rest of the economy.The energy states are especially weak, particularly Louisiana. We'reseeing a lot of out-migration from that state to other states,particularly Mississippi, and that's causing unemployment rates inthose states to move up as well. We now have the distinction, dubiousas it may be, of having the highest unemployment rate in two states--in Louisiana and Mississippi it's over 13 percent. The agriculturalsector is also in bad shape, partly as a result of the drought that Ireported on before. We have had some recent rains in the area butthey've come too late to help most crops. The corn and soybean cropsare destroyed. We've had some marginal benefit to some other cropsfrom that rain. The apparel and textile producers still are reportingthat they're not getting any particular benefit from the decline inthe dollar. They still say that foreign competition is coming in verystrongly and, of course, they are continuing their protectionistcries, particularly from Congressman Jenkins. And I think we'll hearmore of this bill that the President vetoed. At the same time, someof the apparel and textile people who have tried to carve a particularniche in the market are doing better, particularly those who have notonly carved that niche but have improved their productivity throughgreater automation. So it's a mixed picture in that industry; Iwouldn't say that it's completely negative.General business conditions continue to be very good in theurban areas, and this has given rise to more and more talk in a numberof states in the District of this dichotomy that somebody else hastalked about--where we have the rural areas not participating in thegeneral beneficial economic conditions and the urban areas doing quite-21-9/23/86well. That seems to be consistent throughout the entire District. Wehave seen a leveling off of single-family housing, but it's still atfairly high levels and I think will continue to be a source ofstrength in the local economy. Business attitudes are still fairlypositive, although I detect on the part of some people I've talked toa waning of confidence just a bit. That's particularly related touncertainties about the tax bill and the trade sector. Interestinglythough, I don't hear at all any concerns about recession in theDistrict; and I don't hear very much concern about inflation,notwithstanding what the markets seem to be telling us.On the national level, I agree generally with the staffforecast. I might have some marginal difference with respect tounemployment, as I indicated earlier, and perhaps to inflation. Butthose are very minor differences. I, too, would share the greatuncertainty that others feel about the direction of the trade deficitand what that means for overall economic activity in 1987. But ingeneral, I think the forecast is on target. And we can only hope thatthe trade deficit will turn around in a short period of time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, on the national level I'd beslightly less optimistic than the staff's forecast, but it's prettyclose. On the District level, I'm having a little change of heart; Ithink my attitude is changing from one of pessimism to cautiousoptimism. I don't want to damn this by faint praise but I, too, thinkthat we are seeing signs that we may be reaching the trough in theEleventh District. The big increases in unemployment rates seem to beover. In Texas, in both July and August, rates were below the ratesfor May and June. Those July and August rates, however, were veryhigh: August was 9.2 percent compared with the 6.8 percent nationalaverage, but that's down from the 10+ percent that we had a littleearlier. Unemployment rates [are high] in Louisiana; Bob Forrestalmentioned that. New Mexico is about the same as Texas. Our nonfarmemployment may be near the end of its major decline. We did see alittle rise in July in Texas and New Mexico and that comes after fiveconsecutive months of decline. So, hopefully, we're seeing a turnthere. The manufacturing sector remains weak but may be close tobottoming out. Some areas of strength we're seeing include electricaland electronic equipment as well as aircraft and parts. Ourconstruction contracts seems to be stabilizing, at least for now.Construction values remain about 20 percent below year-ago levels.The most pronounced reduction in the energy sector activity alsoappears to be behind us. Our rig count is flat or rising slightly--from very low levels, of course. Our energy sector employment now isdeclining slowly in contrast to massive layoffs just a few months ago.Even in agriculture, the livestock producers are feeling a littlebetter because of higher beef prices. So in summary, Mr. Chairman, Iwould say that maybe we have a little cautious optimism for theEleventh District now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the Tenth DistrictI'm not sure that the cautious optimism is present. The District as awhole, as I think the Committee knows, has not performed as well overthe past year or two as the national economy--measured by either total9/23/86employment or unemployment numbers, personal income gains, and thingsof that nature. There is the difference between the urban and therural that I've spoken of before. However, in my most recent meetingswith businessmen, I found the views of urban businessmen across afairly wide range of activities a bit more pessimistic than in thepast. That is to say, they understand that the economy even in theurban areas is operating at a fairly low level, but they don't haveany great optimism that there is any light at the end of the tunnelthat gives them much hope that it's going to improve over the nearterm. That seems to me to be a bit of a change. The other side ofthat coin is that they have apparently no concern, or little concern,that inflation or inflationary expectations will be revived. As aresult, in the urban areas activity is rocking along at kind of anunsatisfactory rate but at least on the positive side.On the agricultural side on the other hand, there is verylittle improvement other than in the areas Bob Boykin just referredto--that is, in the red meat sector prices of both hogs and cattlehave come up and are at very good levels. There are good profitmargins simply because the [cost of] feed that is necessary to putthose animals to market is less; as a result the profit margins in redmeat industries are very good. If you look at net farm income,however, you could build a fairly good case that it will be about thesame level in 1986 as it was in 1985. If you look a little deeper youwill find, however, that the net farm income is largely attributableto government programs. It's merely a transfer from the federalTreasury to the producers that gives you net farm income that isnearly equal to last year. On the other hand, the net exports ofagricultural products will be at the lowest level in 20 years. Wewill have a net export position of agricultural products that issomething over $7 billion; a couple of years ago that was in the $30billion range. So, the impact of the dollar hasn't hit, and probablywon't hit, in that sector simply because there is production beyondthe U.S. boundaries that is supplying the demand that we used tosupply. So the outlook in the farm area is not very bright.In the energy area, much as Bob Boykin has indicated, thereis a little activity but there's still a great reluctance to do verymuch exploration simply because of the uncertainty of what OPEC'simpact will be on energy prices. They are afraid not that the oilprice will go to $20 but rather that it will go back down to $8 or $10and they will be in the midst of drilling a well that will not pay offif they are successful in hitting oil. So, overall, the District isrocking along at a very low level. But in a sense the tenor seemspositive, except for the foreclosures in the agricultural sector andthe lack of activity in the energy sector.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you. I find the staff forecast in theGreenbook conservative--not in the sense that I think the outlook forreal growth is too low, but in the sense that the very heavy relianceon improvement in net exports is accompanied by what I judge to besome consecvative assumptions about performance of some of the othersectors in the economy. In particular, I have in mind consumerspending, government purchases, and possibly investment a bit. Mypoint is that even if the improvement in net exports turns out to bedelayed, or more modest than envisioned here because of some of the9/23/86other conservatism built into this forecast, it seems to me that wehave a good chance of realizing something like the outlook expressedin the Greenbook, or perhaps even something a touch better. It seemsto me that at the national level the latest statistics are a bitstronger. I am not sure how much to make of all of that. We haveseen these little spurts in the past; the most recent one, I think,was late last year and maybe into January. It is certainly too early,as far as I can tell, to know if that will be sustained.In the District, though, a more upbeat tone--I might sayalmost distinctly more upbeat--has emerged in the last couple ofmonths. A variety of factors are contributing to it; of course, thenational auto sales situation that [unintelligible]. In the Districtin general, retail sales have been good and the retailers I havetalked to said back-to-school sales were reasonably strong. The woodproducts industry, which is very important, is in general doing well.Summer tourism was good, if not great. Defense spending has provideda lift in some locations in the District, and I think there is agrowing conviction that the problems in agriculture are close tobottoming out. Now that's not to say that the emergence from thebottom is at hand or that it would be significant emergence. But Ithink people are taking some comfort simply in the fact that it lookslike the bottom may have been reached. The economy in the TwinCities, which accounts for a good deal of what goes on in theDistrict, continues to do very, very well. So, in general, I wouldsay that attitudes are improving, at least, in the Ninth District andthat there are some signs of economic activity improving.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would say about the same for the EighthDistrict. The most recent indicators we have all would show animprovement, particularly in July. For example, nonagriculturalemployment was up over 9 percent and we even had an improvement inmanufacturing of 1-1/2 percent or so. Retail sales over the secondquarter were quite strong, at a 7-1/2 percent annual rate of increase.Also, both residential and nonresidential construction were strong inJuly, although looking at those sectors over the period of a quarter,they declined somewhat, as you might expect. In terms ofconversations I have had, there has been an improvement in sentimentamong businessmen; retailers said the same kinds of things Gary wasreferring to in terms of good back-to-school sales.On a broader basis, one of the things I have given somethought to is the question of whether this concern about inflation issomething that is just reflected in the markets or whether it hasperhaps what some people would consider more solid underpinnings. Thefirst observation that I would make is that while often marketsoveract in the short run, I think we are looking at something that hasbeen developing over a period of some months--going back to earlyApril--with respect to how long rates have performed relative to shortrates. So I am not inclined to think that this is just a passingfancy, particularly when you look at the kinds of volumes that aretraded--for example, $100 billion a day in the government securitiesmarket. I tend to think of that as condensing the best odds andexpectations of a broad cross section of people, so I am inclined toput some credence in that. Also, one of the things you read about isthe Commodity Research Bureau Index and I asked some of our people to-24-9/23/86take a look at that. Since June that overall index of about 27industrial and agricultural commodities is up at an annual rate of,say, 11 to 12 percent. If you take out the 7 grains in the index,which tend to be very much influenced by the government's supportprograms, it is up at an annual rate approaching almost 30 percent.So, just on that score, I think there are some things happening withrespect to underlying commodity prices that go beyond pure speculativeinfluence. What I have been trying to pick up, and haven't reallypicked up yet in talking to people, is whether the behavior ofpurchasing managers who are running inventories has changed at all.Going back over a period of time when I have asked these questionsthere has been really no expectation of inflation; accordingly, peoplearen't really building any inventories. That is one of the things Iam going to be looking for in talking to people but I haven't pickedup any evidence of that yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of the general outlook, I'dpiggy-back on a comment Mr. Stern made earlier: my GNP forecast onbalance looks a lot like the staff's but it looks that waynotwithstanding the fact that we have a smaller improvement in thetrade deficit than is in the Greenbook. On the trade deficitquestion, I have been on the skeptical side in terms of the rate atwhich that could turn around, and I still am. But for what it isworth, our people did a little informal survey this past week of across section of a couple dozen firms, major and minor; and for thefirst time that survey does suggest some things that are consistentwith at least a stabilization, if not some improvement, on the tradeside. It comes through both in terms of export opportunities beingthere in ways that they were not there before and in terms of importprice pressures beginning to work their way in. One of the surprisingthings we found in the process of doing this survey--at leastsurprising to me--was the emphasis that people on both sides put oncommitments and long lags in orders and processing. One example ofthat was even in soft goods--clothing and that type of thing. Thelags are a year or more, growing out of commitments and contractualobligations that are standing in the way of adjustments being madeeven in the face of more favorable conditions. Now, there is nothingspectacular there--no hard evidence--but at least it is a bit of anindication that maybe the tide is turning, notwithstanding thehorrible July number and the prospect for the third quarter as a wholestill probably being pretty lousy.On the inflation side, I have some of the same concerns thatBob Parry and Tom Melzer talked about. Our forecast is one in whichwe have the inflation rate roughly a half percentage point higher thanwhat is in the Greenbook. In some sense that is not altogetheralarming, but what bothers me is that it wouldn't take a whole heck ofa lot to make me want to mark up that price forecast. Looking around,one of the things that really has disturbed me of late is this patternthat we see in domestic automobile prices--Ford, I guess it was, lastweek announcing price increases on domestic models of up to 9 percent.In the context of the anecdotal reports that people have referred to,I think that is, to some extent, a matter of concern. In the staffforecast, by the end of next year they have the CPI, excluding energy,at 4-1/2 percent. I don't know what the threshold is but my hunch isthat if that were above 5 percent, or if the deflator were above 4-25-9/23/86percent, we would have a very, very difficult situation on our handsby the end of next year. In that setting I, too, don't think thatwhat we are seeing in the financial markets is completely irrational.There is some basis for concern there, notwithstanding the fact that,as Emmett Rice and others have said, there are some downside risks inthe economy itself. It goes without saying that these patterns thatwe have seen in the last couple of weeks in the financial marketsserve as a reminder of the vulnerabilities that are there--whether interms of just volatility or these very, very sharp changes infinancial asset prices over periods of weeks and months. That initself has the potential to undermine confidence in ways that could bequite counterproductive in terms of economic performance. So, I can'tdisregard what the financial markets are doing at all, and I thinkwhat they are saying is that you better be careful here boys.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you prepared to be careful, Mrs. Horn?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That was a [generic] term.MS. HORN. Well, taking off on that lead, the numbers in theCleveland forecast look quite a bit like the Greenbook forecast. Butperhaps, whereas I sense from the Greenbook that the Board staff tendsto look at those numbers and see the glass as half full, I see theglass as half empty. I suppose that is a result number one, of thesituation in the Fourth Federal Reserve District, and number two, ofmy growing disappointment that the expectations I had earlier in theyear for lower interest rates, a higher stock market, and low oilprices coming through haven't yet materialized. Or, if they havematerialized, they haven't been in the quantity that I expected.From the Fourth District vantage point I am unable to reportdevelopments that suggest a step-up in the pace of expansion over thebalance of the year. The flat economy has meant a flat capital goodsmarket and that is key for the Fourth District. Given that, togetherwith strong competition from imports, many District producers--notablyof steel--are tempering their optimism and are starting another waveof restructuring and serious consideration of cost cutting. I seethis attitude not only in steel, but in autos, auto-relatedindustries, machine tools--what is left of them--and machinery-makingin general. Although we are not talking about declining production--things aren't that bad--we are talking about decreasing market sharesin intense competition. All of that is making people think aboutsurvival: about shutting down less efficient facilities and basicallyconsolidating and down-scaling operations generally. I don't thinkthe mood is bleak, but I think there is much less optimism on futuresmarkets and the future ability to gain market share than there was,say, a year ago when there was more hope for what the exchange ratewould do for our world in the Fourth Federal Reserve District. So, Iwould say that in this next year in the industrial Midwest--or what isleft of it--we would have a turbulent time, with the next steps beingtoward restructuring.Businessmen and the directors in our District talk more andmore about their disappointment with the budget process. I am notsure how to evaluate that because there are the two sides--one is thedeficit reduction and the other is the tax increase they are about tobe hit with, or may be about to be hit with. That is something that Ihear talked about more and more as time passes. I think the overall9/23/86effect of these factors is working in the direction of weakening thefoundation for the expansion next year. With the additional drag oncapital goods that we will see from the tax package, I see littlelikelihood of a strengthening in the traditional capital goods market.I don't yet detect nervousness about inflation; people seem preparedto watch prices go up and attribute that to the end of the oil pricecontribution to the indices. Cost control efforts really are alreadyintense and they will intensify. One could argue on the good sidefrom that, but even among businessmen I find skepticism from pushingtoo hard or relying on that on the inflation front. Of course, on theinflation front, if the deficit is not going to be brought down thenthe load will fall once again on monetary policy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I certainly welcome all the comments aboutmarket commodity prices. I would review just a minute by suggestingthat we have a severe commodity price deflation on our hands and Ithink it is encouraging that our accommodation of the world's demandfor financial assets has, in a sense, blunted this deflationary move.It seems to me that there are ample signs that the accommodation ofthis demand has worked. But it is very difficult to stop thedeflationary move without creating some changes in expectations, whichare most apt to show up in precious metal prices. And any index thathas those precious metals in it is going to show that kind ofmovement, which I think is what you might expect. But the indexnumbers that I look at do not show any appreciable change. I think itwould be appropriate for us to recognize that there is a tremendoussupply side force out there in regard to commodity supplies worldwide.I don't think that has changed. I would agree, however, that we areundoubtedly somewhat vulnerable to any outside force that might createa particular kind of shortage that might produce a price rise. Itseems to me that Si Keehn had it exactly right when he said that thisis probably the time to wait and see what happens. I am veryimpressed by the fact that the United States and Canada now have thebest record in year-over-year wage changes. That is, our 3 percentwage increase, year-over-year, is only beaten by Canada's 2.9 percent.A couple of Scandinavian countries are very close, whereas many of ourmajor trading partners are running much heftier wage rate increases.I am somewhat encouraged by those wage rate movements, which mayprovide some stimulus abroad. That is, those wage rates along withtheir low inflation rates, it seems to me, are going to provide somereal substance to better final demand in Germany and Japan. So Ithink that is encouraging. I am in tune with the staff's forecastboth for GNP and prices. I think there is a grave variation in termsof accuracy of these forecasts dealing with the inventory numbers andthe export timing change; but I feel--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I have sensed a change in thespirit of my directors and businessmen in New England in the lastmonth. There is a much more upbeat feeling than there was in thesummer. I find some evidence now that some of our high-tech companieshave begun to say that maybe the yen has gotten to a level where theycan compete with the Japanese and they are planning to try to get backsome of the market that they have lost to the Japanese in the past fewyears. It is the first sign of that sort that I have heard.9/23/86who has a very unusual company calledand their sole business is making equipment and specialHe saidthat on what he calls his consumer products, are a very goodeconomic indicator; and he has noted that in the past two weeks theyhave had a big increase in orders for theCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. American products?MR. MORRIS. American products. But he also sells abroad andhis European orders are going up, too, for whatever that is worth.Boston seems to be the one exception in this downward trend incommercial office building. Our boom is still going on. I went to ameeting a week or so ago on new office buildings and hotels plannedfor Boston and, despite the fact that we have a lot of space coming onstream in the next six to eight months, we still have a tremendousarray of office buildings and hotels planned. It is sort of likeDallas and Houston used to be. I figure we're going to have our glutbut it is a ways off. For people renting space in our building wehave a new program in which we are trying to stretch out leases tonail down today's high rental values because we would like to haveeverybody locked in when the glut hits.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is a great expression of confidenceabout inflation as well as probably an escalator! Mr. Heller.MR. HELLER. I think we are making amazingly good progressthis late in the recovery. Overall, I agree with what most peoplehave said: that there is a more balanced economy than there was lastyear and very little in excesses actually developing. I agree withthe staff that consumer spending is very well sustained and I thinkconsumers are going to get a second wind next year when the tax cutsbecome effective. We see behavioral changes taking place already,both in the financial markets and as far as planned purchasing isconcerned. Investment will be slow in coming, but at least we havebottomed out, especially in the agricultural and energy area; so wedon't have any more drag from those sectors in the future. And thegovernment deficit reduction program, disappointing as it is, will bea positive contribution that should be particularly good in thefinancial markets.I am less optimistic on the trade front, as I saidpreviously. I think our exports won't increase very rapidly but atleast the erosion in GNP due to imports will tend to stop. So,overall, the export sector will tilt a bit more in our favor and thatalso reduces some of those imbalances. On the inflation front, I amamazed by the good news that came in this morning. It is veryheartening. And I fully agree with what Wayne was saying about wageincreases. When you look at the European wage increases, given thehigh unemployment rates, it is amazing that they are all running inthe 5 percent range--much above the 3 percent range that we heard herein other comments before. Overall, I think it is a very satisfactoryperformance with fewer imbalances than we have had in the past.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about those wage increases;those wage increases are low but so is productivity.-28-9/23/86MR. ANGELL. Productivity in the service sector is low but Idon't think we know how to measure it. Productivity in the goodsproducing sector remains right at the 3.2 percent level that it hasbeen at for some time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have just a couple of comments since I haveheard just about everything said that I was going to say. In general,I am probably a hair more pessimistic than the staff, primarilybecause when I look at the auto industry I just have a feeling that weare going to give back more next year than the staff is assuming. Iam impressed with the current sales level--no doubt about that--which,I guess, shows what low interest rates will do and how inattentive alot of consumers are. But I think that this is not all a net gain. Ithink the give-back will show up, particularly in the first quarter.Also, I am just very nervous about the impact of tax reform on a wholelot of things, but particularly on business spending on new plant andequipment and on office buildings which, of course, are already underthe gun. I think that is just going to provide one more discouraginginfluence.We have been talking about this trade turnaround for a numberof months and expecting that to provide quite a bit of support for theeconomy, and I certainly hope that happens. But Senator Riegle sentme a little story which, with your permission I would like to tell,because I think it demonstrates how difficult it is to turn off theimport competition. This involves one of his constituent companiesout in Michigan; they produce Being non-mechanical, I have no idea what those are, by the way, but apparentlythey are very important in the production of engines. The companysupplies parts for about three-fourths of the engines produced in thiscountry and the Japanese had been their primary competition. Theyhave revamped their entire operation, they have spent heavily on R&Dand on new equipment, etc., they have gotten wage concessions, andthey have tried to imitate the Japanese in the labor-managementrelationship. They have done remarkably well in dealing with theJapanese [competition] and they are now selling their main part for$5.50. Now, all of a sudden, the Koreans are calling on their majorcustomers in this country and are offering them very similar productsat $3.50. This isn't something I picked up; it came from Don Riegle.But I think it is very indicative of how tough this job is going tobe, particularly when we haven't seen the dollar deteriorate vis-a-visthe Korean currency. I just hope and pray that we can get somemovement in the currencies of these newly industrialized countries,particularly in the Far East, or I don't think we are going to seethis big turnaround that we are counting on. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You think that big improvement in[unintelligible]. How are they going to pay the interest on theirdebts?MS. SEGER. That's somebody else's problem.MR. ANGELL. I think we should note these prices are not[unintelligible].MS. SEGER. No, they were for-29-9/23/86MR. ANGELL. It must have been perMS. SEGER.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else want to say anything?MR. JOHNSON. I guess I should put in my two cents worth. Ireally don't have much to add; I think everybody has covered most ofthe basics.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From every point of view.MR. JOHNSON. That is right. My own views are not that muchdifferent from the staff's, either. I am a little more pessimistic onthe trade side. And looking a little further down the road in 1987, Iworry about how this automobile situation is finally going to workitself out. They are making a big contribution in sales this quarter,which is going to drain inventory and have a fairly neutral effect onGNP. Even in the fourth quarter, it appears that their inventoriesare going to build back up because the incentive programs will go offand demand will slide. What comes after that is somewhat of aconcern. Are they going to cut prices, which doesn't appear to be thecase, or are they going to build in deeper incentive programs? Howmuch have they borrowed from the future? My concern is that there maybe some bigger production cutbacks ahead in autos, perhaps in the 1987period. The numbers are working out about right for 1986, it appears.The third-quarter trade just doesn't look like it is going tomeet our expectations, at least if the July numbers are half correct.I realize there is a gold sale phenomenon in the accounts but thatdoes not make me feel that comfortable. So I am a little morepessimistic, but I do see a turnaround. I don't think you can have adepreciation of the dollar of around 40 percent against the majorindustrial countries' currencies and not see some improvement. Ithink that we are getting close to the peak of the trade deficit andthat some improvement will start showing up. If it just stoppedincreasing, we could see a good improvement in the GNP growth rate. Iam a little concerned, too, as I have mentioned before, about some ofthe changed environment in the financial sector. I do think a lot ofit is associated with the turmoil over who is going to contribute toworld growth. There has been a good bit of expectation developingabout interest rate reductions in Europe and Japan, which haven'tmaterialized. That has added to the argument of some policy makers inthe United States that the only way to solve the trade deficit, as aresult of this resistance, is through an ever lower dollar.Obviously, that is going to create some anticipation in the financialmarkets that trying to solve the trade deficit through a substantiallyweaker dollar ultimately could be inflationary. I think that is afactor contributing to the turmoil of financial markets. Hopefully,if growth is stronger in Europe than we are thinking that will improvethe situation and calm the environment a bit and exports will pick up.I think that is the only thing that ultimately is going to calm thatenvironment. The outlook doesn't look that good in Japan; I think wehave to place most of our hopes on Europe and hope that Germany isright unless they are planning to reduce their interest rates a littlelater. Maybe this European exercise to support the dollar will helpbut I am still concerned about the mechanics of that and how that'sall going to work out. That is my two cents.9/23/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.] Thank you, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's break for donuts.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When I look at this economic forecast ofthe staff, I don't know how good it is as a forecast, but it looks tome in a less than perfect world to be about as good an outcome as onecould wish for. It has a nice tapering off of domestic demand, a goodboost from the export side, real progress toward our longer-rangeobjectives and we escape without too much inflationary pressure. So,if we can achieve that result we would be fine. Now, the question is:How do we achieve that result? I will just make a forecast that weare not going to have very startling policy moves arising out of thismeeting, so I would be glad to hear about your nuances. You can proveme all wrong. Who would like to comment? Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, I have a little nuance, Mr. Chairman. Iagree with you that we are sort of locked into a no-change situationhere at the moment, but I am concerned about the increase in liquiditythat we are building into the system here. If you look at thesecurity holdings of the commercial banks over the past four months,they have risen by $31 billion of which $21 billion is in governmentsecurities. So, with loan demand so weak, we actually are pumping inreserves and the banks are placing them in fairly liquid form. Itseems to me that if we ever do get the economy reaccelerating that weare going to have to lean against this liquidity growth at a fairlyearly stage. At the moment I would support alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That doesn't sound too nuanced. Mr.Melzer.MR. MELZER. I also would favor alternative B. Policy hasbeen moving in one direction for some period of time and I don't thinkit's appropriate to turn it around on a dime. I have some concerns,as you know, about some of the developments on the inflation andinflationary expectations front. Looking down the road, I think wehave to be mindful of the fact that the operating regime that we arepursuing now provides the reserves that are demanded, so pressuresaren't really going to show up in the funds rate. After things havehad time to settle out--and I guess by that I mean the effects of thedecline in interest rates and so forth, all things being equal interms of the economy--if we don't begin to see some of the slowing inthe aggregates that Don has referred to, then I think we have to beprepared to move to a firmer stance. As I say, the pressures are notgoing to show up in the funds rate, and I think we cannot continue toprovide reserves at the rate we have been under the circumstances Ijust brought up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. Alternative B would be my choice. We have beenexpecting the fundamentals to produce a pickup in economic activity,and it appears from the recent data that that is occurring. At the9/23/86same time, I think financial markets are concerned about inflation andthe effects of a particularly easier policy on long-term rates and thevalue of the dollar would be adverse at this point. I share Tom'sconcern about overshooting our targets for M2 and M3. If I had tointroduce a nuance, it would be at least in terms of verbiage leaningslightly toward greater restrictiveness.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I would first like to endorse yourstatement that this would be a pretty darn favorable outlook. Inparticular, considering that this is the fifth year of an economicupswing I don't think we would have expected to have done any betterthan that. As I indicated earlier, I think the biggest risk is thepossibility that this present pessimism that we have in the bondmarkets will gain momentum, with long-term interest rates backing upfurther. Obviously, that would not be a very healthy development fromthe standpoint of the domestic outlook. I think a lot of the concernin the market is stemming from some reduced hope that the Gramm-Rudmanprocedures and the reduction in the deficit will be possible. Thereis certainly nothing we can do about that from the standpoint ofmonetary policy, but I think some of these developments clearly stemfrom a change in attitudes and a feeling that there has been anincrease in the possibility of inflation. I think that stems, inturn, from at least two factors. One is the recent action of OPEC;but I think it is also probably nourished by some growing uneasinessabout the substantial growth in money and liquidity that we haveprovided recently from the highly publicized moves of the Systemtoward greater accommodation. So, I think this is a time when wereally ought to pause and take stock and convey a posture of cautionto both financial markets and to the public in general, and I wouldfavor alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. I, too, favor alternative B. Like severalothers, I must say I am troubled by what has happened in the bondmarket in recent weeks. It seems to me that, for whatever reasons,there has been some deterioration in inflationary expectations, as Mr.Melzer and others have suggested. Beyond alternative B, and maybe byway of a nuance, I think we need to find some way to signal moreclearly to the markets that we have a mechanism in place that willenable us to respond, should that become necessary, with a somewhatmore restrictive policy. I think we will need some accompanyinglanguage in the directive to make that clear. It seems to me thatsuch a stance would help to assure market participants and perhapswould be positive in terms of its ultimate impact on long-terminterest rates; it also would be desirable from the perspective of theway fiscal policy is turning out. I must say that that situationlooks worse than even I thought it would be, and I have beenpessimistic all along. So, I would say that while alternative B is afine starting point, we need to think a little more about the processby which we respond to the behavior of M2 and M3 in this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I can just interrupt a second: Therehas been a lot of talk about the fiscal situation. I don't knowwhat's optimistic and what's pessimistic. I think it's Mickey Mousewhat they are going through to get $154 billion; it isn't realistic.-32-9/23/86But I guess I would just as soon that they didn't get to $154 billionfrom $220 billion all in one fell swoop. If you believe the staffforecast, which is what?--$225 billion to $177 billion--that doesn'tsound too bad to me as a change from a year ago. It's not quite $50billion less but $40 billion or so anyway.MR. JOHNSON. $230 billion is about the forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I thought the forecast was about $225billion--whatever. That may be about as much as it should be in oneyear in my view, if you really believe that number. Now, I don't knowhow solid that number is; I would guess it may be higher than that, Isuppose. However, what do you allow for in the farm program?MR. KICHLINE. It was $32 billion last year and we have $26or $27 billion in fiscal 1987; the Administration has something like$18 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, good luck.MR. JOHNSON. That's a good point. The smoke and mirrorsthat they are going through right now likely will add to that $50billion and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you believe the $50 billion, I don'tthink it's all that bad. But I don't fully believe the $50 billion.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As far as a lot of the markets areconcerned the smoke and mirrors, to use Governor Johnson's term, justreinforce the out-year problem. I think that's what nagging at--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Some day they may have to think about evenincreasing taxes; maybe that's what you go through to prove you can'treduce expenditures. I don't want to get off on this subject. Mr.Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I, too, would support alternative B, Mr.Chairman, without any nuance at all. I think we are at a point intime where we need to pause in monetary policy. As we pointed out,the numbers coming in are not all that bad; the forecast is areasonably good one. And, while I don't think that markets areinfallible, I think that we do have to pay some attention to what hasbeen going on in the markets recently. To ignore the steepening ofthe yield curve would be perilous for us, but I think we need to stopand assess the situation for another three or four weeks and letprevious actions work their way through and hope that we get the kindof improvement that we want. One of the things that may be botheringthe markets as much as inflationary expectations is their feeling thatwe have not only abandoned Ml but that perhaps we are in the processof setting aside monetary targeting all together. I think the marketsare asking what kind of an intermediate target we have, and I thinkthat is something we will perhaps have to take into account. I don'thave any answers, certainly, at this point, but I think this kind ofpause is desirable. So, I would favor alternative B with borrowing ataround the level of $300 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.-33-9/23/86MR. BOEHNE. I am for alternative B without any nuances. Butthat is against the background that we have been on a one-way streettoward ease. We have pumped in a huge amount of liquidity by thesevarious measures that we look at in terms of the Ms and reserves andcredit--although some of those can be "funny" numbers. But theconclusion is that we have put in a lot. We can analyze what themarket is telling us, but I think they know that it's a lot easier fora central bank to ease than to tighten, and they may be beginning towonder how much we are going to overshoot and whether we will have thekind of backbone, when the time comes, to show that we can operatemonetary policy on a two-way street. I think for now we should staywhere we are but we ought to begin to think about what might happen toall of this liquidity and how we might deal with it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I would join those in favor of alternative Bwithout a tilt one way or another. It seems to me that there areconflicting trends regarding the strength of the economic outlook andconflicting trends with regard to the inflationary situation. To alarge extent we have done our thing over the last few months.Clearly, the markets are beginning to resist these changes. Perhapsthe decision the next time is going to be harder than it is this time;but for now I would simply stand back and see how events develop.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. I am for alternative B. As we have been easingpolicy over time, with each subsequent move we have increasingly askedourselves the question: Can monetary policy really help the situationof the imbalances and so forth? For the last couple of moves, which Ihave been in favor of, I have found it harder to answer the questionthat monetary policy will help. I think we probably have gone aboutas far we can with monetary policy and now it is time to stop andwatch the developments.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With no nuances?MS. HORN. No nuances.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Alternative B.MS. SEGER. Alternative B straight.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. I will join the landslide. Alternative B, nonuances.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. My view is the same, "B."MR. JOHNSON. I am in favor of alternative B. I'm torn aboutnuances. I wouldn't mind having some language describing why we arepausing and seeking no change--language that would be associated with-34-9/23/86the yield curve and with commodities and the dollar to at leastprovide some sort of criteria for a guideline. Somebody elsementioned the fact that one problem is that people are starting towonder in the financial markets what the guideposts are. They don'tthink that we are paying that much attention to the aggregates, whichwe are not, and I think we ought at least to tell them what isimportant to us to some extent. I don't know quite how to engineerthat language, but I think it would be useful.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, having heard people, I have come to theconclusion that alternative C is what we are after.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want to tighten up a little?MR. WALLICH. If you have to do something, you do something.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I will join those who prefer "B" notwithstandingsome of the comments I made earlier in the discussion with respect toM2 and M3 and the concern that we should be expressing to the market,either verbally or otherwise, that we are not abandoning theaggregates. I share some of those feelings, but if we are going torock along at 2-1/2 or 3 percent growth, I would hate to be focusingon M2 and M3 going marginally above the top of their range and takesome action to tighten up. So, I conclude that "B" is the appropriatecourse now and I would not be very receptive to any movement in theperiod ahead if M2 and M3 are going to exceed their targets in just amarginal way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I will go for "B" but I have anuance. It's a little more than a nuance. I think at this juncturethat we have to be prepared to pave the way for the possibility thatwe might have to tighten. Paving the way doesn't mean that we have togo down that road; but to be positioned to do that if the need arisesstrikes me as important. So, I would lean a little in that direction.The question of what we would do over the balance of the year if M2and M3 burst out on the upside of those ranges is a question that hasto be faced. We don't have to face it decisively right now, but Ithink we have to have that possibility in mind. I, for one, thinkthat we'll be faced with that situation; we are not going to be ableto sweep it under the rug.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what all that means [forpolicy].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It means "B" with a little bias inthe direction of snugger rather than easier.MR. BLACK. It probably means more emphasis on "woulds" than"mights."VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. More emphasis on what?9/23/86MR. BLACK. On "woulds" than "mights."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Heller.MR. HELLER. Alternative B without comment or reservations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I better read what alternative B says.Well, something like $300 borrowing is fine and I don't have anyproblems with alternative B. The question is what happens if, let'ssay, the business situation goes along pretty much as expected but themonetary numbers continue to run high or the dollar is weak, and[unintelligible] are weak. To use a word I picked up from Mr.Sprinkel in a different context when he made a comment about thebusiness outlook gathering strength--that's not what I am referringto--we do expect that the inflation rate is going to "ooze up." Thequestion that I raise is: Under what conditions should borrowings oozeup?MS. SEGER. Hasn't he been expecting that for three years,though?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's [unintelligible] the oozingup word.MR. BLACK. What kind of increments are we going to use tomeasure ooze, Mr. Chairman--$50 million, $25 million?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have the current problem that theborrowings are so low that every time something unusual happens theyget higher. The first question is whether we are bothered by that;I'm not. If somebody's computer goes out or they get caught late inthe day by some withdrawals or something what do we do? Leaning overbackwards to try to offset that seems not to be the order of the day.We haven't been doing that and I would think that we don't want to dothat. We don't do anything at the moment but the question is beyondthat. A number of people raised the issue of liquidity. If, forinstance, the aggregates continue to run pretty high--higher than whatalternative B straightforwardly suggests--and the business newscontinues reasonably on the firm side and let's say, just to putanother thing in, that the dollar doesn't look all that great, shouldwe ooze up on the borrowings more or less deliberately? I interpretwhat some people said as certainly in that direction, but I am notsure about the others. Many people just said they were neutral. Idon't know what they meant by neutral. That's what a straightforwardinterpretation of the directive permits.MR. JOHNSON. My interpretation is not so much that I thinkhow much attention we pay to the aggregates still depends on whatvelocity is doing; it's whether the economy seems to be catching on inthe face of growth in the aggregates. I am not that troubled by theaggregates performing strongly. If we have another huge negativevelocity number, I think the third quarter is going to come in aboutlike the second quarter. Given evidence of that, if commodity priceskept rising and the yield curve kept steepening and the dollar wasstill under pressure, that would be criteria for oozing up theborrowings a little in my opinion.-36-9/23/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it would in mine, too. I don't knowwhether I would necessarily expect the yield curve to continue torise; it might or might not. But a sense of inflationary expectationswould be a factor, however measured. In those conditions, with theaggregates running high, I would ooze a bit.MR. JOHNSON. Are you suggesting that we have a $300 milliontarget that we just [unintelligible]? Are you saying that we workharder not to offset these other leakages?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I wouldn't offset those right now.I figure actually changing [borrowings] a little, not very much.Oozing is meant to convey that you lean with a slight drift, whichwouldn't carry borrowings above $400 million, I don't think. But youmight ooze by less than that.MR. JOHNSON. So you're just saying leave some discretion onthe borrowings.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, and mostly on that side. I see itless likely, given where borrowings are now, that we would want toooze on the down side.MR. ANGELL. I certainly believe if commodity prices were tomake a move upward by a significant amount, [precipitated] by someunforeseen event, that it would require us to look more carefully atthe monetary aggregates and to tighten slightly; and I would take theborrowing up to $400 million. I don't know how likely it is that thatevent is going to occur, but I think it would be appropriate for us tohave an understanding that a move would take place if it needs to.MR. JOHNSON. Well, what is "C"? I don't want to ooze intoalternative C.MR. MORRIS. One way of doing it, Mr. Chairman, using lastmonth's directive, is to change "somewhat greater or lesser reserverestraint" simply to "somewhat greater reserve restraint," indicatinga bias.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the kind of thing we could do.MR. ANGELL. I am not sure that we want to have greaterreserve restraint. I don't want greater reserve restraint right now.I would only want it under certain spelled-out conditions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, spell out all the conditions in greatdetail. If we can get a sense of that and then do it--. I amassuming there is no change now from what we have been doing, right atthe moment.MR. MORRIS. We would have but one direction of ooze.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could have another direction of ooze ifsomething went wrong. If the economy was clearly weak, the dollar wasclearly strong, and the aggregates were behaving just fine, we wouldmove in the other direction.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The anatomy of an ooze.9/23/86MR. BLACK. But you wouldn't go as far as "C" because thatwould be a trickle instead of an ooze.MR. ANGELL. The markets would interpret that as more than atrickle--SPEAKER(?). If the yield curve steepened, policy would betighter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You may get some argument about that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [It could] go the other way first.[Unintelligible] what we care about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not talking about anything that willbe a very overt move. Anything we are talking about is within therange of natural fluctuation anyway, but it's a little sense of wherewe are aiming over time and in certain contingencies. Why don't wejust look at the wording and that will resolve the problem: "Maintainthe existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. This action isexpected to be consistent with growth in M2--" What numbers do wehave here?MR. ANGELL. We had 7 to 9 percent the last time.MR. GUFFEY. That's still okay.MR. ANGELL. I would think so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is 7 percent too low or not as anestimate?MR. ANGELL. I think 7 to 9 percent is fine.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the midpoint is 8 percent; 7 to 9percent encompasses the midpoint. We won't say "respectively;" wejust say--MR. ANGELL. Yes, it refers to M2 and M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It refers to both at annual rates of about7 to 9 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 9 percent is above--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 7 percent is below. What the staffsays is 8, 8-1/2 percent; that's roughly in the middle of 7 to 9percent. We have this great choice of whether we say "about 8percent" or "7 to 9 percent." The "7 to 9 percent" doesn't bother megiven the behavior of these things anyway.MR. PARRY. Isn't this the same discussion as last time? Ithink it was 7 to 9 percent, the same numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we did was encompass differentnumbers for the two. I don't care: either 7 to 9 percent or about 8percent.9/23/86MR. ANGELL. 7 to 9.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I detect no realistic difference between"about 8" and "7 to 9." This says "about 7 to 9" and maybe that is adifference. We have a nuance of difference.MR. JOHNSON. "About" goes with 8 and not with 7 to 9.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we always say "about" even when we usea range?MR. ANGELL. You could take the "about" out, if you want tobe more specific. We put "about" in there for fuzziness at one time.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think this is decisive, butif you say 7 to 9 percent for the balance of the year, you are sayingthat you are prepared to tolerate growth outside the boundaries forthe year for both M2 and M3, though not by a lot. If we had 9 percentgrowth in M2 and M3 for this period, we would end up about where "A"is, and on the charts "A" is outside the cone. It's a trivial amount.MR. ANGELL. If we are looking here at 9 percent, with about9 percent you are going to stay on there.MR. JOHNSON. "B" would stay right on the cone.MR. ANGELL. But the 9 percent stays on the cone.MR. JOHNSON. That's what I am saying, 9 percent would be"B." It would be moving right along that cone line, since we areright on it now.MR. ANGELL. That's right. And M2 is slightly under it.MR. KOHN. It doesn't quite work that way because of thecompounding problems that--MR. JOHNSON. I guess you are right.MR. KOHN. In other words, you need a slightly lower growthrate--like the 8 or the 8-1/2 percent--to keep you moving along 9percent from last November's base. Of course, you are talking abouttenths of a point here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand how these lines[unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. I assume that we are on the line and if we'reon the line and the line says 9 percent--MR. PRELL. It's more on a linear scale than a log scale. Itwouldn't be much if you did it on a log scale.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's because it's not logarithmic.MR. MORRIS. The deviation is trivial.9/23/86MR. ANGELL. This is splitting hairs over something that weknow nothing about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. I think it's either "about8 percent" or "7 to 9 percent." What are the preferences? Whoprefers 7 to 9 percent? I count 9. I guess we have a majority for 7to 9 percent. I am a little embarrassed by continuing this sentenceon M1 about this great expectation that doesn't materialize.MR. RICE. Sooner or later we will be right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what we can do with it. Inthe interest of variety we might express the same sentiment, but do wehave to express it in exactly the same words?MR. ANGELL. Yes, let's stay with it until we--SPEAKER(?). We can put it lower in the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, we'll leave it the same, asembarrassing as it is. Now we get to the nuances. Let me--MR. JOHNSON. That one still leaves the door open. We canooze in that way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No we can't. No, I wouldn't want to oozein this language. If we wanted to make it a little more explicit Iguess we could say something like "slightly greater" instead of"somewhat greater." We could say: "Slightly greater reserve restraintwould be acceptable should the aggregates exceed expectationsdepending upon the strength of the business expansion, developments inforeign" etc., and "somewhat lesser reserve restraint might beacceptable" and so forth and so on.MR. MORRIS. I think we need an asymmetrical statement thistime.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I made it non-symmetrical just by changingthe "would"--MR. JOHNSON. Changing the "would" and putting "might."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have done that lots of times. We cando it all in one sentence which is what we have often done. But if wewant to put a little more emphasis on the aggregates, we could justsay "somewhat greater reserve restraint would and somewhat lesserreserve restraint might be acceptable depending upon" just what youhave here.MR. JOHNSON. Split the two out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that would put them both in the samesentence. I tried to make a little distinction that the aggregateswould trigger this depending upon the other things. We could stillsay "depending on the behavior of the aggregates, taking account ofthe strength of the business expansion" and so forth. That's ourrather traditional way of doing it.-40-9/23/86MR. ANGELL. I would suggest we add international credit andcommodity markets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to get too many things inthere.MR. HELLER. What would we really do differently ifinternational credit markets would change unless it's [unintelligible]to the exchange rate?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think international credit markets ismeant to be a code word for--MR. JOHNSON. If the Germans lowered their interest rate--MR. ANGELL. Or the dollar depreciates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought it was, frankly, a reference tothe international debt situation. Let's change "somewhat" to"slightly" and say "somewhat greater reserve restraint would beacceptable or slightly lesser reserve restraint might"--. I guess"slightly" should go after the would, too: "slightly greater reserverestraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint might beacceptable depending upon the behavior of the aggregates and takingaccount of..."MR. MELZER. "Taking account of" probably does it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your way without the "and"; comma, "takinginto account the behavior of the aggregates," etc. Is that all right?MR. MORRIS. I question, Mr. Chairman, how many people wouldreally want to support the condition of lesser reserve restraint. Idon't know; conceivably there could be conditions that wouldgenerate--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me ask the question this way. Iwill give you the most extreme test of that. This doesn't rest onanything very dramatic in the economy. In this period of a few weeks,suppose the Germans and Japanese say: We will reduce our interestrates, but you have to reduce your discount rate again to help usalong. Think of it as good politically, or for some reason or other.I don't think they will say that, but suppose they do.MR. ANGELL. Suppose the Japanese stock market went downdramatically and suppose oil prices started heading lower dramaticallyand we got some other kind of movements there and a pessimismprevails--if M2 was growing at 5-1/2 percent and M1 was at 6 percent,I think you might want to have lesser restraint.MR. MORRIS. I would rather leave it out now and have theChairman call a telephone conference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can make extreme assumptions about thebusiness situation which are not inconceivable, but which I don'tthink are very likely during this particular period. I think it'smore likely that the question I raised could arise, but I don't-41-9/23/86consider that very likely--don't misunderstand me. But suppose it didoccur?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. On the merits, the best outcomewould be that they lowered their rates and we didn't.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have to question their [unintelligible].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That would be where I would start;that's for darn sure.MR. JOHNSON. I don't think it's likely that we would need touse the alternative for ease. It just doesn't look like thatalternative is going to materialize. But I certainly wouldn't want toleave it out as a possibility; you never know. The "might" and"would" nuance deals with it okay; I wouldn't want to just leave itout completely.MR. ANGELL. I don't think there is any reason to make itappear in the minutes [for this meeting] that we know what's going tohappen in this atmosphere. I think we ought to leave it balanced, butwe can imagine in our minds what is likely on either of these or whatmight be.MR. RICE. I think we balanced it just right.MS. SEGER. Wasn't it back in May that we put in theasymmetrical language? And when those minutes were reported somepeople in the media were saying that we almost tightened and they madea big thing of that.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I don't mind giving signs that we didn'tlike what we saw in the financial markets. I would like people to beable to look back and see that in the discussion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does Mr. Morris have any followingfor leaving [the easing alternative] out entirely?MR. MELZER. I would support that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a following but not [a majority].I think we appear to be for an asymmetrical nuance.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would like to raise a questionon the other side--that is, with regard to the language of 7 to 9percent on M2 and M3 and the importance of that language with regardto snugging up a bit or oozing up a bit. We are at the top of thoseranges now and I guess I have an operational question as to how eitheryou or the Desk would respond. What would you do if M2 and M3 startedcoming in at 9-1/2 or 10 percent and the economy was working alongwithout much problem? Would you then ooze up? Unless you saw somereal strength in the economy, I would hope you wouldn't ooze up untilM2 and M3 burst out as Jerry Corrigan described it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I just gave you my interpretation.We are not talking about a great [unintelligible]; we are not talkingabout one week or two weeks. We are talking about some sense that itis indeed running high and that if other things were proceeding as9/23/86expected--if we didn't get any weakening in the economy, didn't getany strengthening really in the exchange rate, the oil price was notgoing down another $3--yes, we would ooze. But it's only an ooze.MR. GUFFEY. It's not triggered off 9 percent; it's somethinghigher than 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it can go higher than 9 percent bysome figure in one week or, necessarily, by one month's figure. Butif it was one month, the fact that it was continuing--as best we canmake these appraisals--and there weren't any signs of tapering off,yes, we would ooze. But it's only an ooze and, given all those otherthings, it's not much of a quibble. Do we have enough understandingof what we are talking about to vote on this? It's: maintain; 7 to 9percent; slightly greater reserve restraint would and slightly lesserreserve restraint might be acceptable depending on the behavior of theaggregates, taking into account all these things; and 4 to 8 percent.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesGovernor Heller YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Melzer YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich I'd be against it. I havethis view of what we can do but it shouldn't be in this context.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, you want to tighten a little. Iguess we are finished.END OF MEETING