Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 5, 1986A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Wednesday, November 5, 1986, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 1/Mr. AngellMr. GuffeyMr. HellerMrs. HornMr. JohnsonMr. MelzerMr. MorrisMr. RiceMs. SegerMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis,Kohn, Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Prell and Siegman,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account1/ Entered the meeting after action to approve minutes for meetingof September 23, 1986.11/5/86Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director forMonetary and Financial Policy, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Simpson and Slifman, Deputy Associate Directors,Division of Research and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Broaddus, Rolnick, Rosenblum, and Ms. Tschinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofRichmond, Minneapolis, Dallas, and Atlanta,respectivelyMr. Beebe and Ms. Clarkin, Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of San Francisco and New York, respectivelyMs. Gonczy, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof ChicagoMr. Meyer, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank ofPhiladelphiaTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofNovember 5, 1986MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.] And I might say thatthis morning, following the elections, it had been expected that aDemocratic victory would lead to some weakness in the dollar. Therewas a very temporary decline in the Far East with the dollar movingdown from 2.06 to 2.04 [against the mark] and comparably against theyen. But that lasted only a few hours and in the evening before Tokyowas closing the dollar was beginning to move back up. Subsequently,in European markets, it has moved back to about 2.06-3/4. So it isnow at a higher level than it was yesterday.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any questions or comments on theswap extensions?MR. BOEHNE. Is there any more to say about the so-calledagreement between the Americans and the Japanese--particularly what itmight portend for the future?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what it may portend for the futureis anybody's guess. I don't know anything more about it. Mr. Bakerhas been looking for some reason to say something nice. And he had itwith the discount rate reduction and this report that the Japanesemight reduce taxes sometime in the future. But they said it hasn'tgot any operational significance in terms of intervention in anydirect sense. I think it is quite consistent with intervening ifthings perhaps became extreme in either direction, but it is nocommitment to undertake anything.MR. BOEHNE. The view on Germany is essentially as it hasbeen and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Germany? I think the situation is quitedifferent in Germany in the very short run. They have been growingpretty fast. I saw Mr. Poehl earlier this week and he's still armedwith all these numbers, which I--. You can argue that 3 percent istoo modest an objective for Germany. But they can make pretty goodprogress if they are growing at 3 percent--which in their view is goodenough--with 5 to 6 percent domestic demand and a minus on theexternal side, which of course is what people want. And right nowthey can show it at least for two quarters. Their monetary growth isstill exceeding their targets by a significant amount, which doesn'tmake them very happy. They are sitting there worried about how theyare going to explain this. They have to announce new targets inDecember and they say: Do we rebase or do we [unintelligible]? It'sthe same type of problem that we have.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You're in a position to give a lotof advice on that subject.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I did. His charts for the first time--heshowed me charts [unintelligible] just like the ones that we have, butfor two years [changing] the base. One chart has a very expandedscale on the vertical axis, just the way some of ours do. The chartlooks at the last two years and it has these little wedges on it andit shows the actual movement in the monetary base. And the actualmovement for two years in a row now is way above the wedges. While11/5/86they've been closer than we have, their scale was so expanded that itlooked pretty bad. It was just like the kind of thing that you--MR. MORRIS. Well, they have real wages growing at about 5percent in Germany--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They did this year.MR. MORRIS. --at a time when the unemployment rate is almost9 percent. I would think that if we had that situation we might be alittle nervous about expanding too much as well.MR. TRUMAN. But the wages were really set, basically, beforethe prices went down. And so real wages on this [unintelligible]economy. That's one of the questions: whether or how long thisrecovery is going to be sustained. The basic wage bargains were setbefore they had experienced the effects of lower oil prices and[unintelligible] and the exchange rate change and prices came down.MR. MORRIS. That's true. But they still settled for the 5percent wage increase at a time when the unemployment rate was veryhigh. I should think that--MR. TRUMAN. Some of that was deliberate, too. Last fall, infact, the government was talking of wages as a way to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Their GNP deflator--that's domesticprices--is running at about a 3 percent annual rate of increase. It'slike ours running higher than the CPI; there is an even sharperdiscrepancy than in this country. There is concern over what mighthappen as they get into next year. I guess their Economic Institute'sprojection has raised some question about it. A 3 percent growth nextyear--which is what they're projecting--depending upon what happenedlast quarter and what happens this quarter does not imply a 3 percentrate of growth from fourth quarter to fourth quarter next year butsignificantly less than that.MR. HELLER. But the labor markets in Germany are very tightright now in skilled workers. They just can't hire anybody. Openingsare--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But their unemployment is in the north.That's what they keep saying, it's a regional--MR. HELLER. Also a sectoral unemployment.MR. MORRIS. So they're like the British in that sense.MR. HELLER. And because they have the enormous terms oftrade gains in the external sector they [can] pay the high wage thisyear without hurting themselves domestically in making it show on theinflation front. But I think the difficult situation will be nextyear when the terms of trade don't improve any more and people havebecome accustomed to big wage increases.MR. MORRIS. Exactly.11/5/86MR. HELLER. But if the weakness should show through, I thinkthey're fully prepared to move forward to 1987 the tax cuts that theyare now scheduling for 1988--although those deadlines are passing veryrapidly right now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they won't do anything before theelection and part of the--MR. HELLER. Not before the election, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Part of the problem is that the oppositionparty adopts an American view to economic policy, or vice-versa, whichis very embarrassing to the government. So if they did anything theywould appear to be adopting the opposition's economic view; and forunderstandable reasons they don't want to do that. Actually, theBundesbank wants to take some technical actions that appear astightening and wouldn't really be--I don't understand it all. Theywant to get rid of rediscount quotas, which they think are getting outof line, and substitute some other way of putting the money in themarket. But I'm afraid if they do that it will be interpreted as atightening.MS. SEGER. Is it true that they were willing to cut theirdiscount rate in August but the word got out so they were upset?There was a little article in today's paper to that effect.MR. JOHNSON. Well, the words I've heard are literally thatthere was more pressure at one point to raise the discount ratebecause of the growth of the aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that was probably a little later.My impression is that earlier [Mr. Poehl] maneuvered so as to bepotentially in a position to reduce the discount rate in earlySeptember, say, which is what he was talking about. But then theaggregates got high and there was all the public discussion and soforth, and the GNP numbers came in as strong as they expected. Allthose things together made a discount rate cut less likely rather thanmore likely as September actually arrived.MR. FORRESTAL. Can you give us any more information aboutthe Mexican situation? Specifically, is it in difficulty or--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's hard to tell. It's a bigsubject. Why don't we have a discussion about Mexico after themeeting? Are there any other questions about the market? We do havethis question of routinely extending the swap lines.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would move it.MS. SEGER. I second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion of that? If not, you areauthorized to routinely roll over swap lines, Mr. Cross.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]11/5/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments?MR. MELZER. Peter, do you have any thoughts on the declinein the demand for excess reserves?MR. STERNLIGHT. We were steadily moving up our allowance forexcess reserves. We had moved the standard allowance up to $900million in the first few months of this year. Since about March orApril we have tended to fall a trifle shy of that $900 million level.And now we think that maybe the demand was augmented somewhat in theearly months of this year by some seasonal factors. So, I'm notconvinced of any basic decline in the demand for excess reserves. Ithink it has probably leveled off and what we are seeing now is just alittle resistance for seasonal reasons. We will have to be watchingcarefully as we get toward the winter months again to see whether weneed to review that and go back to something like the $900 millionlevel.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other observations, wehave to ratify the transactions.MR. MORRIS. So moved.MR. JOHNSON. I second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any objections? Mr. Prell will clarifythe economic outlook.MR. PRELL. He will attempt to. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.[Statement--see Appendix.]MR. BOEHNE. I wonder if you could elaborate further on yourdiscussion concerning the recent increase in import prices--but interms of how you see that improving our trade balance and how you seeit impacting the domestic price level.MS. HORN. I would like to piggy-back on that and ask: How dothey come through in the CPI? Do you have an estimate or rule ofthumb that you use about what proportion of the CPI is import pricesand so on?MR. PRELL. Well, let me just say a couple of words, and Iknow Ted Truman will want to address the broader issue. The moreinteresting recent data on import prices were the BLS figures thatwere released just last week. They showed a substantial increase inthe prices of a number of commodity groups--something on the order ofa 12 or 13 percent annual rate of increase. On the consumer priceside, it's very hard to trace these changes in import prices throughto what is happening at the retail level. It's apparent that some ofthose groups that would seem to have relatively large importcomponents, say, apparel and automobiles, are showing relativestrength in terms of consumer price movements. But it's very hard topin this down. Let me let Ted say something about the broaderanalytical issue on the pass-through of that sort.MR. TRUMAN. On the consumer price level there are threechannels: the direct impact from higher prices, the indirect effectsof competing goods, and then some allowance for aggregate demand11/5/86effects. We used to say that the rule of thumb was that somethinglike a 10 percent decline in the dollar on the G-10 index would giveyou, after three years, something like a 1-1/2 percent increase in thelevel of the CPI. But the work that we have looked at recentlysuggests that it may be a little less than that--perhaps something inthe 1 to 1-1/2 percent range. One of the reasons it is less relatesto the same phenomenon that we have debates about--what is the rightindex? The prices of some imports--especially to the extent that theyare imports from countries against which the dollar is not falling--will not be rising as rapidly as the others. It is through thatdifferential effect, however, that you are essentially going to changethe distribution of trade. As far as the general question about[prices] feeding through, ultimately you have to get some prices up inorder to get some consumers or importers to change the way they aredoing business. And in that sense there is both good news and badnews in the price increases that now seem to be coming along. Thegood news is certainly that the process that should lead the decision-makers to look elsewhere--maybe at home--to satisfy their needs isstarting. So far there is certainly some evidence of slowing in therate of growth in the volume of imports. I might also add one smallfootnote on the BIS figures that came out on Friday that Mike referredto: the revisions show a higher increase in import prices than thenumbers that were incorporated in the GNP figures that were releasedearlier in the month. That would suggest that for a given value ofimports you would get less quantity, ceteris paribus.MR. HELLER. In the Greenbook data in that first table, I-7,you have some amazingly good news that you didn't even refer to in theoral presentation or the written material, and that is a 0.4 increasein the GNP deflator for the fourth quarter of 1986--unless it's atypo. Would you tell me about this?MR. PRELL. It's 0.7. This is one of those quarters in whichthe movements in imports and import prices do something very exotic toGNP prices and, particularly, the deflator. As you can see, the thirdquarter was 3.6 percent. It was above the recent trend and [thefourth-quarter number] is essentially offsetting that, given thegyrations of imports and the effects of changes in the relativeimportance of oil prices.MR. HELLER. But you just said you expect import prices to goup and--MR. PRELL. All things equal, rising import prices drive downGNP price measures in the short run because imports are subtracted.That is one of the recurring novelties. I think if you look at thefixed weight measures we are getting some of this showing through.MR. HELLER. Too--MR. PRELL. But it's smaller in effect there.MR. PARRY. There are two effects. It's the change inweights and then the change in prices.SPEAKER(?). One question about the near term: I noticed thatyou have a fair runoff in farm inventories and also an increase ingovernment. Is that an offset? Is there a CCC thing going on there?11/5/86MR. PRELL. Let me check. Yes. We have a $4-1/2 billionincrease in CCC inventories. That's roughly the range we have beenseeing the last couple of quarters, so there is no gyration in that.Basically, it's something that goes through from our overall outputestimates.MR. PARRY. Well, that should show up in government spendingat the same time. It didn't last quarter, I don't think. Governmentspending last quarter actually declined very substantially. The rateof growth in the fourth quarter was up, so maybe it just got swamped.MR. PRELL. Defense spending in the third quarter was flatand we have a noticeable uptick based on what we would perceive to bethe deliveries. Obviously, there is some very erratic timing; someprocurement items show up or don't show up in any given time period.MR. PARRY. Are there any indicators that support the slowingin state and local spending to that extent?MR. PRELL. We don't really have much to go on there. Thereis some elusiveness in tracing the data that we do see to the BEA'stranslation. We can track what is published for construction put-in-place in the state and local sector, but BEA does considerablemassaging of those data in estimating the structures component ofstate and local expenditures. Basically, in terms of the overallbudgetary situation, we just don't see the likelihood that that kindof growth can be sustained. In fact, we have been averaging somethinglike a 45 percent annual rate of growth in state and localconstruction over the past two quarters; it has really jumped up veryrapidly. So, we are looking for that to level off quite a bit.MS. SEGER. Would you answer a couple of questions about thedistribution of activity in 1987? Specifically, for producers durableequipment you have a rather significant pickup between the increase infirst quarter of next year and the remaining portion of the year.From your general comments I am trying to figure out why you wouldhave it picking up that much.MR. PRELL. Well, we have [unintelligible] this tax effectbuilt in. It's rather small but when you annualize these things theybegin to look bigger. In effect, we have a small payback on theequipment side in the first quarter of next year because we areassuming that they will succeed in accelerating some of theirpurchases into this quarter and thus capture the more liberaldepreciation allowances.MS. SEGER. So you don't see a negative tax reform impact,then, beyond the first quarter?MR. PRELL. We perceive that there is some increase in thecost of capital. The tax law changes, if nothing else were changingthe outlook, would be tending to depress capital spending. But all theother considerations--including the fact that, as we perceive it, realinterest rates have declined considerably over the past year or so andthere is a long lag in the effects of that on spending--are tending tooffset that change. Furthermore, we think that as output[unintelligible] demand, firms--particularly in the manufacturingsector--will be more inclined to move ahead toward modernization,11/5/86replacing their older equipment, and continuing their efforts toreduce costs and increase productivity. It's not really a very rapidgrowth of investment spending, but we think there is a reasonablefoundation.MS. SEGER. I guess I am just more nervous about it, but Ican't quantify my--MR. PRELL. We are still in a situation where it's hard toassess the effects that have already occurred because of anticipationsor uncertainties relating to tax reform--whether some of the hitalready has been taken or whether people now will move ahead knowingwhat the laws will be. It is very hard to read the current situation.MS. SEGER. Also, on residential structures, you have quite anice turnaround between the second and third quarters of next year andthen additional strength in the fourth quarter, if I am reading thiscorrectly.MR. PRELL. These annualized growth rates for residentialinvestment tend to exaggerate, I think, the movements in housingstarts that are in the projection. But we have the single-familysector improving a little as 1987 progresses.MS. SEGER. Is this an interest rate play or what?MR. PRELL. Well, part of is, I think. But it's not really asignificant interest rate effect. It's more a come-back in terms ofthe underlying demographic factors. And, as construction in themultifamily area winds down and rents begin to show the effects inthat area, it's just going to tip the balance a bit further in favorof single-family home ownership, which we think the demographicfactors already are going to be favoring. But we don't have atremendous change in the overall affordability of single-family homes.MS. SEGER. Yes, I notice your housing starts are prettylevel.MR. PRELL. On the single-family side, we move from around1.15 in the third quarter up to just over 1.20 in the second half ofnext year, so it's not really a dramatic change. The multifamily sideis continuing to trend downward through most of next year.MS. SEGER. A final question on the domestic auto sales:Apparently you assume that the so-called "give-back" will all beaccomplished in the fourth quarter of this year and then sales will besort of flat and unexciting quarter by quarter in 1987.MR. PRELL. I'm sure it won't turn out that way. Short offorecasting every twist and turn in marketing strategies, we havesales coming back toward what we think will be a reasonable overallpace for the year. But yes, [unintelligible] and is consistent withthe payback largely being through by the end of this month and thingsbeginning to turn up a bit--perhaps with some renewed incentives, ifnecessary. But we don't at this point anticipate that there will begigantic incentive programs put in place in the near term.11/5/86MS. SEGER. So, you are not assuming that GM has really beengambling on this approach and that without these incentive programsthey will dramatically [cut back] their production schedules?MR. PRELL. We see them trying to keep things on a stablelevel, [given] the actions they took in October to cut back theirproduction schedules. The [unintelligible] of what we pick upsuggests that maybe they are going to move toward a somewhat morerealistic approach to their production, so we might see something thatis a little smoother, in fact, next year without them pushing so hardto maintain what seems to be an unrealistic market share expectation.MS. SEGER. Thank you.MR. MELZER. Mike, the trend in personal consumptionexpenditures has been upward since the fourth quarter of last year.You are really showing a dramatic shift in the fourth quarter, which Iguess is primarily autos.MR. PRELL(?). Yes.MR. MELZER. Do you try to factor into that the effects ofthe tax legislation and accelerated big ticket purchases to the extentthat you can?MR. PRELL. Well, we have certainly attempted to do so. Ourassessment is that there may be a very small effect. A number offactors lead us to think that it will be small. One is that manypeople may already have made the big move to buy an automobile beforeyear-end--in September when they could also get the big price cuts andthe rebates and the other financing arrangements. A second factor isthat, in most states, that sales tax deduction does not bulk verylarge as a percentage of the price, even for automobiles. And whatone can bargain with a dealer for may be more important than that.Many people [don't] itemize their deductions; furthermore, for goodsother than automobiles, people generally are going to be using taxtables and this specific purchase doesn't become an important matterin further deductions. So, putting all of these things together,we're looking for just a very small effect in the consumer sector.MR. MELZER. A related question: What happened to realdisposable income in the third quarter?MR. PRELL. It moved down.MR. MELZER. I know.MR. PRELL. Three things seem to be the major factors there.One is that farm subsidy payments were much smaller than they were inthe second quarter. Those have been a considerable short-run swingfactor this year. The second factor is that consumer prices were upin the third quarter because oil prices [were no longer] going down orflat as in the first half of the year. The third factor, which isalso very important in these numbers but is rather obscure, is asubstantial increase in personal tax payments that wedges betweenincome and disposable income. We have tried hard to track this downwith parties elsewhere in the government, but it remains a somewhatobscure area. It is something that has been a factor in bouncing the11/5/86disposable income numbers around over the course of the year.Basically though, we think that underneath all of this is adeceleration in disposable income growth in large measure related tothe end of that oil price effect.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would people like to comment on their ownviews of the outlook? Bob Parry.MR. PARRY. I think there have been more signs of possiblestrength in the economy since the last FOMC meeting than there have ofweakness. The signals that we see coming from the Twelfth District,on balance, are really rather positive. Total employment andunemployment figures showed continued improvement in September andthey paint a better picture than that for the nation as a whole. Asan example, the District's unemployment rate fell in September, incontrast to the nation's, to 6.8 percent; and we've seen employmentgrowth over the past year averaging just under 5 percent compared to2.2 percent nationally. We also received data on trade from thePacific area customs districts for August and September and nongrainagricultural exports, particularly cotton and also rice, seem to bebenefiting from the lower dollar and also from the effects of the 1985farm bill. The lower dollar and Canadian strikes are also helping theforest products industry. Aero-space and related electronics are asource of considerable strength in many areas of the District and theservice industries are performing well.At the national level, it would appear to me that the signsare relatively strong--clearly not as strong as the western region,but favorable. Recent monthly statistics that have been mentioned fororders, for new home sales, and for leading indicators in merchandisetrade do indicate some strength. And I do believe, similar to theGreenbook [forecast], that the third-quarter runoff of inventoriesshould lead to greater production in the current quarter. And itwould seem to me that based upon, admittedly, a very preliminaryreading of the third-quarter trade numbers that there is a chance of aturnaround in net exports in the fourth quarter. The monthly tradenumbers for August and September looked as though they had improvedsomewhat and, at least in some of the deflators I've looked at, theprices of durable imported goods are rising rapidly. So it appears asthough the prices of U.S. exports are becoming more competitive. Insummary, our forecast for growth in '87 is very close to that of theGreenbook. We expect a pickup in inflation next year of relativelymodest proportions. The changes in our forecast since the last FOMCmeeting produced a little lower rate of inflation next year, so ourforecast suggests a better trade-off between growth and inflation thanwe had before.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. In our District the fundamental conditions arevery consistent with the pattern that we've had, really, all yearlong. The unevenness that I've commented on before certainlycontinues. Those who are doing okay are really doing quite well, andthe weak parts of our District show no particular signs ofimprovement. I hate to bring the agricultural subject back up, butthere has been a renewed outbreak of gloom in that area for two verydifferent and diametrically opposed reasons. First, the flood damagein September was localized, particularly in the central Michigan area,11/5/86but in the areas that were hardest hit the crops were virtually wipedout. That, of course, is an adverse condition that's completelyunrelated to the basic adjustments going on in agriculture. Theopposite problem exists in the other parts of the District. Theharvest is now largely completed and I am told that the production hasjust been huge, phenomenal. While the acreage for total productionwill be down, on a per acre basis the yields have been very, veryhigh. That means, I think, that the carryover stocks are going to beheavy. The pressure on commodity prices will continue. In the thirdquarter we do a survey of land values and, again, we saw somewhat of adecline in land values. Whereas we thought we were somewhat in thezone of stability with regard to land values I am beginning to hearthat we're going to see another slide off--nothing too sharp--butnonetheless that we have a way to go before we get down to the bottomlevel. And that suggests some more pressure on the agriculturalbanks, so we've got more to do there. On the manufacturing side theadjustment process goes on. I might note just a couple of latedevelopments, which I'm sure you've read about. GM has this overhangin the market. They're probably going to close as many as 12 plantsand that, of course, will have a significant impact on the District interms of employment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many plants do they have?MR. KEEHN. Gee, I can't tell you that. But I think 12 wouldbe a fairly big percentage.MR. BLACK. Almost by definition.MR. KEEHN. Of that number probably 7 are going to be in ourDistrict. We think the employment [effect] could be as high as say,23,000, which would be a very, very significant number. Anotherstructural adjustment in the manufacturing sector comes[unintelligible] engine. I think I commented the last time that theywere thinking about downsizing their domestic production. They havenow announced that and will be outsourcing to a heavier degree thanthey have done in the past. On the inflation side, I think the trendis continuing to be favorable; what I hear anecdotally is very muchconsistent with what Mike has suggested. On the price side, as I hearit, the conditions are very, very competitive and it's very tough toget price increases to stick. And on the wage side, people arecontinuing to get three-year contracts and very good work rulechanges; average costs are favorable so that the productivity aspects,I think, have been pretty good.As for the outlook, certainly, our forecast is consistentwith the staff's forecast. We have every expectation that theexpansion will continue at, say, 2-1/2 to 3 percent. And importantly,we see no current signs that we can fall back into a recession; but onthe other side, we don't think that there's a significant risk that wewould break out on the up side either. So, we're broadly consistentwith the staff forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I keep hearing about all these great workrule changes and enormous hope for productivity increases and I lookat these figures and I see no productivity increases. Would Mr. Prellplease explain to me the discrepancy between what I hear and what Iread?-1011/5/86MR. PRELL. It seems like whenever I'm up here giving abriefing the same question arises about the productivity figures. Ithink many of these collective bargaining agreements involve themanufacturing sector where the data would indicate that we have beengetting fairly substantial increases in productivity--maybe not asmuch as the anecdotal evidence for individual companies would suggestbut, on the whole, quite good gains. For this cycle the gains aremuch more favorable in comparison to past cyclical experience than forthe rest of the economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. More favorable than past cyclicalexperience?MR. PRELL. Well, I guess at least as favorable as--MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. PRELL. --previous cycles in contrast to the overallpicture. But, as you know, the total for the nonfarm business sectorhas been less favorable and the data, such as they are, show that in anumber of the more service-oriented sectors we just aren't seeingproductivity improvement.MR. ANGELL. Of course, what this means--and I've had severalconversations with our staff over this--is that, with productivity inmanufacturing doing what it is and the way we go about measuring it,we have to have negative productivity in the service sector. And thatraises the question as to how we measure productivity in the servicesector; the fact of the matter is that we really don't. So there issome kind of strange averaging process going on there. I thinkthere's really grave doubt as to what our productivity in the servicesector is. But if productivity in the service sector is stronger thanwe're measuring then that means, of course, that our economy is doinga little better than we are measuring. So there are those two aspectsthat are very interesting.MR. BOEHNE. There's another aspect to take--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't think more computers mean lessproductivity?MR. ANGELL. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That depends on how one--MR. BOEHNE. On this issue of work rules, we have an autoplant in our District run by one of the big three auto makers. Theythink that their biggest problem in the American [work]place is not somuch price or productivity as it is quality--actual quality and theperception of quality. This is such an interesting story that I'mgoing to visit the plant. I talked to the manager there the other dayand he says that they are putting their emphasis not so much on howmany cars they can get out in a day but on how many cars they can getout that don't have defects. And they think that is where the payoffis in terms of the market. Now, I don't think our productivityfigures capture that sort of thing, but it certainly is an improvementin the output if you can do it right the first time.11/5/86MS. SEGER. Yes, but you had to get some work rule changes toimprove the quality.MR. BOEHNE. That's exactly what my point is: that the workrule changes are going into the quality aspects rather than improvingthe measurable productivity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It decreases the GNP; we don't have allthose repairs that go in there!MR. PRELL. A different aspect of quality in a more secularrather than cyclical area is the question of quality of the laborforce. Some researchers have suggested that [taking account of] thequality adjustment in the labor force--[based on] indexes like SATscores or mix of workers or whatever--you find that our laborproductivity growth trends have not been as bad in historical contextas they look. It's a very controversial area.MR. BLACK. If we have a flu epidemic [unintelligible], Mr.Chairman, that would decrease GNP too.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [The way] the SAT scores work,[there are] negatives and positives.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] but that's what he says.Productivity in the educational system is going down.MR. PRELL. Well, if you wanted to use SAT scores and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. I agree with Bob Parry. I think the evidencewe're looking at today suggests that the economy is strengthening. Wehave the new orders in durable goods and capital goods; we havestrengthening in basic materials prices. We've been looking for adecline in the trade deficit to really carry the economy next year andwe're getting very strong anecdotal evidence that this is takingplace. When we had the Beigebook survey I found that every companythat was interviewed that does a significant export business reportedan increase in export orders--aircraft engines by GE, computers,medical instruments, and so on. Right across the board, there werevery widespread increases in orders for exports. We always get veryimpatient waiting for this two-year lag to take place, but the turnseems to be coming on schedule.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sure is in our projection. I hope it'sthere.MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, our sense is that the Septembertrade numbers that were released, the so-called statistical month-[end] numbers, were probably better than the underlying trend. Sothat means that for the sum of these months--October, November, andDecember--we're going to get some very much worse numbers. If youlook at the raw data--not the nice leading indicators President Morrishas cited--they are a little peculiar because the export numbers arenot particularly good. In fact, most of the improvement in the Augustand September numbers is in the import side where, although we'reexpecting a slowdown, we're not expecting a drop off.11/5/86MR. MORRIS. [Unintelligible] phenomenon for the last coupleof months. And so we shouldn't expect to see them recorded in theactual shipments for another 6 months or so.MR. PARRY. I'm not quite sure I understand what you'resaying, Ted. You have a $19.3 billion improvement in the real netexport position. That's got to show up--MR. TRUMAN. Half of that is oil. Half of what's going on inthis fourth quarter is oil.MR. PARRY. Yes, but I think it's going to show up in themonthly numbers; if the monthly numbers get much worse than they werein September you're not going to get a $19.3--MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but if we had to redo the forecast with thenumbers that now exist the third quarter would look better. Thefourth quarter might not be changed much.MR. PARRY. I see.MR. TRUMAN. And that's based just on the fact that it lookslike we've got some lower imports--that we're probably going to getnegative numbers, or not so big numbers, on the import side in thefourth quarter. Exports are beginning to come in a lot more, as Mikementioned. On the current import side our sense is that the monthlynumber ends up getting built into the quarterly GNP numbers and thenyou're stuck with them for--MR. PARRY. So you're comfortable with the second-halfimprovement?MR. TRUMAN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're finished?MR. PARRY. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. Our numbers for the District continue to lookpretty good. We continue to have better growth in non-ag employmentthan we've experienced nationally. Retail sales in the most recentthree-month period have gone up more rapidly. And we've had aturnaround on the construction side where we have been lagging a bit;both residential and nonresidential construction in the third quarterwere quite strong. Anecdotally, on the retail side, a nationalretailer in the District mentioned that for three months now they'veexperienced stronger numbers; he wouldn't describe it as a boomsituation by any means, but it's the first time for a long period oftime that he has seen three months--August, September and October--with continued improvement in terms of their own sales. On the priceside, we had a group of small business owners in for lunch not toolong ago and I asked them whether any of the developments in terms ofmarkets and expectations of higher prices were affecting theirbehavior at all. And there was certainly no evidence among that smallgroup that they felt any better able to put through price increases or-13-11/5/86were seeing any major increases in their costs. So, at that level,there is no real change in the price picture.I would say on the overall forecast that the one differencewe might cite is that we would tend to be a little more [positive] onthe personal consumption side just because of the rate of increase inincome growth over the course of this year versus last year. As Mikepointed out, the fourth-quarter GNP number is more than accounted forby net exports and the inventory numbers; and if personal consumptionwere to be stronger we could be looking, in the short run, atconsiderably stronger GNP numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. At the District level, I think our numberscontinue to look rather good, although quite varied. Pennsylvania isa state that has characteristics both of East Coast prosperity andsome of the problems of the industrial Midwest. But on the whole, thenumbers have continued to make us look better than the nation as awhole. At the anecdotal level I have noted a less pessimistic viewamong manufacturers about the trade business. Two or three months agothey were very skeptical that the drop in the value of the dollar wasgoing to have much of an impact. What I notice now is that theirorders have begun to pick up and inquiries to their firms are pickingup. They now are feeling a little better--feeling that they may begetting back into this ball game. I think that is a subtle butimportant harbinger of what might lie ahead.At the national level, we tend to go up and down in thisCommittee. I think back over the last year and it seems we get onemonth of figures that look better and we feel better; and then we comeback the next month and the figures are a little less; we sort of goup and down. If we seasonally adjusted it all my guess is that wewould conclude that things are probably unchanged. There is a touchbetter evidence, I think, from the trade side as well as in some ofthe forward looking indicators. I think we need a little moreinformation to conclude that there has been a significant improvement.But having said that, I think that the latest statistics tend to makeone feel a little better about a broadly unchanged outlook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, in the Sixth District thesituation has not changed very much over the past six weeks, which isto say that conditions are pretty mixed in the area. Picking up onsomething that Mike Prell mentioned, there seems to be growing concernthat the tighter restrictions on municipal finance and the smallergrants in aid as a result of the tax bill are going to slow the area'sefforts to improve the public infrastructure and provide needed socialservices. The weak areas in the District--that is energy andagricultural--continue to be weak. We got a little benefit from thereduction in the drought situation, but the rains came a bit too lateto help most of the crops. Confirming what the staff said about therig count, we find that in Louisiana the rig count actually has risenslightly in the last couple of months, although I hasten to add thatconditions in Louisiana and in that general energy patch are stillvery, very depressed. Another area that continues to concern a numberof people is the office overbuilding situation. In the Atlanta-14-11/5/86downtown area it doesn't look too bad; the vacancy rate is about 15percent. But as you move to the outskirts, particularly with newerdevelopment, vacancy rates are as high as 40 percent. That average isnot as high as in other cities but office overbuilding clearly is avery serious problem and is continuing to be so. The same is true formultifamily rental units, which are experiencing record high vacancyrates. In spite of all those negatives, as I talk to people I thinkthere is a fair degree of optimism about what's happening not only inthe District but in the country. There is a feeling that the fasterpace of activity in the third quarter is going to be sustained andthere is growing confidence, supported by some of the recent numbers,that the trade sector is going to do better. In fact, we have seen inour District orders from textiles pick up significantly over the pastmonth or two. There are early indications--perhaps more anecdotalthan anything else--or some suggestion of a pickup in agriculturalexports as well.Looking at the national picture, our outlook is very much thesame as the Greenbook's. We think that for the next several quarterswe are going to have a growth rate for real GNP that's close to the 3percent mentioned in the Greenbook. But that kind of growth ishinging on consumer spending and on an improvement in the tradedeficit. We're putting most of our money in those areas, as it were.And I have some concern that perhaps we won't get the kinds ofimprovements that we're looking for there. So I would think that ifthere's risk in the economy the risk is on the down side. I say thatabout consumer spending partly because the discretionary income thatpeople have as a result of the drop in oil prices is beginning totrail off, as are some of the effects of the greater wealthexperienced in the form of a run-up in the stock and bond markets.Another uncertainty in the whole picture is the extent to whichadjustments to the new tax law have already occurred versus how muchmore there is to see. We did a little survey, a very informal one,but it suggested that about 50 percent of the businesses that wetalked to had built the adverse treatment of capital into their plansbefore the tax law was enacted. Altogether, I think the picture isencouraging; certainly, the District on average is doing better thanthe nation as a whole and we think that the expansion is going tocontinue. But again, I would stress that in my view the risk is onthe down side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. In the Fourth District we don't really seeevidence of a resurgence in the economy nor do we see anything thatwould indicate that we're going into a recession. As I look aroundthe District I have the opinion that Ed Boehne expressed: that it'ssort of more of the same. I think my directors in general and thebusinessmen I talk to have that opinion. I think we're more concernedin our area about the restructuring that's going on in some specificindustries--steel and autos come particularly to mind, although Isuppose machine tools could be put on that list as well. But thisidea of an unchanged outlook, I think, is embodied in most forecastsand I would have no quarrel with it.On the District level, one of the interesting stories we'relooking at is the steel story. My view is that there is more and morerecognition by the management in those companies, and maybe by labor11/5/86as well, that the problem is not imports and it's not exchange ratesbut that the problem is more basic than that--whether you call itovercapacity or whether you call it inadequate demand to supportcapacity. They are beginning to look at that and simultaneously, Ithink, are trying to deal with it constructively. Now, whether it canbe dealt with or not is another issue, because as they close plantsthey have pension costs and the fringe benefit liabilities, and Icertainly don't see how they're going to deal with that. But at leastI see a recognition of what the problem is and an attempt to deal withit. Of course, the USX strike has bought the industry time; it hasclosed down something like the proportion of capacity the industrywould like to see closed down. So a little time has been bought bythat. We don't see in our District what Frank Morris sees on theexports side. What we see in the foreign sector is that people arebeginning to feel better about import prices and that they are poisedand ready to take advantage of that by moving their own prices up assoon as they see the window to do it. I see a shift of attitude inthe foreign sector, but that's the one that I see.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. Let me just comment on a couple of the changes inour District because I think the fundamental two-tier nature of theeconomy is well recognized, and that hasn't changed much in recentmonths. Perhaps what shows most clearly the distinction between whatis happening in the rural areas as opposed to what's happening in themetropolitan areas is that the unemployment rate in the Twin Cities isnow down to 3.7 percent. That is really a rather remarkably low ratefor our economy. But that kind of prosperity is not translated ingeneral once you move out into the rural areas although, of course,the cattle and hog producers are doing considerably better. Some ofthe producers in Montana, where they had a drought until this year,and some of the wheat producers and others are feeling better, but Iwouldn't want to make too much of that. Certainly, the agriculturalproblems persist in general. I think anecdotally though, some of whathas already surfaced at the table certainly is occurring in ourDistrict. There's just an awful lot of talk of potential improvementin exports. That kind of talk seems to be occurring in someconsiderable magnitude and it's clear that people who are interestedin foreign business are starting to feel considerably better. As alsohas been mentioned, at least as far as we are concerned, pricingremains very, very competitive. One of the striking features that hascome up in conversations that I have had with business people recentlyis that the pricing environment is still very competitive and they arestill very, very concerned about their costs and so forth. Ingeneral, that would be a healthy aspect, in my mind.As far as the overall economic outlook is concerned, I haveno particular quarrel with the Greenbook forecast. I think that's arespectable outlook and certainly, in the context of the fifth year ofan economic expansion, something that I can live with. My intuitiontells me we may do a touch better than that, but it is not the kind ofthing that I think is going to make a material difference in terms ofhow the economy performs or in terms of what happens to rates ofinflation and so forth, at least over the horizon of the next four orfive quarters.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.-16-11/5/86VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As far as the general economicoutlook is concerned I would associate myself with the broad profileof the staff forecast. I think the risks are pretty well balanced. Iwould add that I would consider an outcome over the next five quarterslike the staff forecast quite acceptable, considering where we are inthe business cycle and considering the range of structural problemsthat are out there that really don't have a heck of a lot to do withmonetary policy in the short run. One thing that bothers me is that Ican't for the life of me figure out what to make of this tax bill.It's so complex. I think we're just going to have to wait and see howthat shakes out. But it is a major uncertainty as far as I'mconcerned. On the trade side, we too encounter many, many anecdotalcomments along the lines that Frank Morris and Gary Stern havementioned. And at this point I think they're more broadly based byindustry groupings. A few months ago we heard some of that inchemicals and paper and that was about it. But now there is some inother industry groups as well. An interesting little side light tothat on the other side of the equation--the import side--came up in adiscussion Sam Cross and I had with some Swiss people yesterday. Now,Switzerland is not a great exporter to the United States; butnevertheless they indicated to us that just in the past several weeksthere had been a very sharp decline in orders at Swiss companies forexports to the United States, presumably concentrated in so-calledhigh-tech and electronic types of products. Again, not thatSwitzerland is a big exporter to the United States, but it was rathera dramatic report just because it seemed to be so sharp and so suddenin terms of their experience. I have a couple of other anecdotalitems. I had a conversation with a fellow from one of the largestmail order houses in the United States at a business leaders meetingwe had on the 22nd of October. He told me that in the first threeweeks of October--which is kind of the beginning of the Christmasbuying season for a mail order firm--they had set records across theboard in terms of their mail order business. The other development,which is regional in character or is maybe just in the New Yorkmetropolitan area, is that the housing market and the labor market inthe New York metropolitan area continue to really be booming. Pricesof houses are just out of sight. On the labor market side I'llprovide a great vignette: I noticed Saturday when I was out doing acouple of errands that the help wanted signs for part-time workers inservice-type establishments seemed to abound. That, of course, is avery local phenomenon, but nevertheless--. Overall, as I said, Ithink the staff forecast is a reasonable one and an outcome that Iwould find quite acceptable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. As I see it, I don't think there has been a lotof change in the business outlook since our last meeting. I thinkthose, led off by Bob Parry, who had the perception that people in themarket and other observers think the statistics look a little betterare correct. But if you look at them on a moving average basisthey're not quite as much better as you might think on the surface.The anecdotal information we pick up from around our District, whichhad been pretty good, I would say was a tad worse than it was maybe amonth ago. When I try to figure that out, I think one of the factorsis probably the paucity of any information that suggests that we'regetting any acceleration of the upturn. The other thing that seems tome to be more important now is the doubt that business people seem to-17-11/5/86have about the effects of the tax law on businesses. For example, oneof our directors said at our last meeting that he estimated the taxchanges would cost his business $3 million more in 1986 and $5 millionmore in 1987. And I think most of them are viewing it that way. ButI think the financial underpinnings are certainly there to accommodateany kind of reasonable upturn that we might have in the economy.I believe the staff is right in what it has done in theGreenbook projection. As several people alluded to, if you break thatprojection down between gross domestic purchases and net exports ofgoods and services, you see that the projection shows gross domesticpurchases for next year running well below what they're doing thisyear. By dividing it that way it focuses pretty crucially on theimportance of the net exports side. So, if we are to get an increasein GNP that means that the net exports side of it has to come through.I think that's a reasonable thing to expect; as several people havenoted, we are seeing a lot of anecdotal information that this kind ofthing is happening. There are all sorts of measures of how much thedollar has depreciated, but when you get through all of those I thinkyou have to conclude that in real terms there has been a prettysignificant depreciation in the dollar. So I think it would be rathersurprising if we didn't get some kind of a turnaround in our realbalance of payments with this kind of improvement in the terms oftrade. We think we'll see that more, of course, in the real figuresin the GNP than in these monthly census figures on merchandise trade.They may not show up. But after the deflation, I think it's going toshow up in net exports of goods and services. I don't know whetherit's of any value or not, but one of our economists ran a VAR modeland he usually gets results almost diametrically opposed to what theBoard staff has; but that [model] suggested about the same kind ofimprovement that the Board staff has projected. It might concern youmore that two models suggest the same thing than if neither did!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's a VAR?MR. BLACK. Vector autoregression is what it stands for.MR. JOHNSON. I think it's a modern times series model.MR. BLACK. It came along after we finished our graduatework, Mr. Chairman, so we weren't really exposed to it in those days.So, we would buy the staff's forecast and we would say the chances oferror are about equal on each side of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I don't have very much new ordifferent to report for the Eleventh District. Things have continuedpretty much as they have been. We do think that we're at the trough,as I reported last time, or certainly very close to it. I guess you'dsay it has stabilized or has become stagnant, whichever term you wantto use. As hard as we're looking, we really don't see any visibleevidence of an upturn but neither are we finding evidence that it'sgetting worse. As a result of our District's economic conditions, thebanking situation doesn't seem to be improving. Looking at thenational economy, we don't have any real issue to take with the staffforecast. We might tend to be a little less optimistic on real11/5/86growth--but not anything very significant--and to a certain degree onthe inflation outlook than they projected.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. As I've been thinking about this year and ourdifferent views as we've gone through the year, it seems to me thatthere has been some general paring of forecasts for real GNP,particularly for 1987. I still think, even with that, that there issome downside risk, particularly in the next 6 to 9 months or so. Ihope Mike Prell is right that the auto bulge is going to bestraightened out this quarter, but maybe because I'm cynical about theauto industry and things can vary I just sense that they've borrowedmore from the future and that it's going to take more time to makethat up, unfortunately. Also, I continue to be a worrywart about theconsumer debt situation. When I read the article about Sears and itsexperience with rising amounts of uncollectibles, and so forth, thatdidn't make me feel any better. Also, in the multifamily housing areaI heard a story--anecdotal but I think it may suggest that we havetremendous problems in apartment vacancies--that down in Bob Boykin'sarea they're giving free braces to people who are willing to sign two-year leases for apartments. I guess that just shows that the dentistsown the buildings!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MS. SEGER. Oh, you can get braces now up to age 60. I'd saythe market is probably pretty big. Anyhow, I think it does suggestthat there's some urgency here to move people into these emptybuildings. Again, that didn't make me feel terribly good. And that'swithout even considering the tax reform items. I really think thatthe tax reform is going to hit the multifamily or the apartment areaprobably as hard as any sector of the economy. It's sure going toknock off some of these limited partnerships that have been used tofinance them. And for offices the same is true: there are lots ofvacancies and it's very difficult to unload space. I don't believeI've heard it mentioned at the table here but there's a real problemcoming up with hotels because so many have been built. It's not justin Washington, D.C. where all the lobbyists control them, but in manyparts of the country there has been a lot of hotel construction andit's reaching the point where there is an excess of rooms and somereal downward pressure on plans to put up additional hotels. Finally,in relying heavily on the trade turnaround I certainly hope that ittakes place. I've heard some stories about additional orders forAmerican exporters or soundings on the possibility of additionalexport business. But I also continue to hear stories about howdifficult it is to meet the import competition from the countries thatwe seem to ignore, countries like Canada and Korea and Hong Kong. Andit seems to me that if we're going to close this gap we've got toaddress both sides--not just expand our exports but put a damper onour imports. I'm not talking about trade restrictions, believe me.But I don't see a lot of evidence that the import surge is slowingdown. So I guess I'm just generally negative today.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question about multifamilyhousing. I hear about all of these surpluses, which I assume aretrue, but my impression is that rents are still going up at about thesame rate of speed. Is that true?11/5/86MR. PRELL. The CPI measure hasn't shown any significantchange in the rate of increase recently.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you explain that seeming dichotomy?MR. PRELL. Well, I'm not sure we can. One thing that may bea source of concern about that measurement is the treatment of vacantunits. They evidently make some adjustments for the discontinuousmovements in rents that occur after units have been vacated. While wecan't manage to get into the details of how they're actually doingthese adjustments we think there could be some upward bias in themeasurement of rent increases recently.MR. MORRIS. Also, the big recent increases are in theNortheast where the vacancy rates are very low.MR. PRELL. That's another point. The sample may not becapturing the developments across the country correctly because it maynot be representative of the current regional mix.MR. BOYKIN. There are other things going on, too, that thenumbers might not capture. Talk about the incentives on thecommercial side! There are a lot of incentives on multifamily units,as evidenced by the signs in front of a lot of these projects saying"The move is on us!" with a picture of a moving truck. They say theywill pick up the moving expenses, give free rent the first six months,and then talk about the rental rate later. There are all kinds ofincentives at work, so it may be that for reporting purposes the [truecost of a] rental is not actually being shown. By the time you workin--MR. STERN. It would be interesting to know how long some ofthese units were standing vacant, actually.MR. BOYKIN. Jerry Corrigan talked about the very rapid pricemovements in homes, and we are having that too. In Dover a friend ofmine just offered $100,000 less than the asking price and the ownertook it before my friend could even back off.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have rich friends [unintelligible].MR. BOYKIN. It was just a $300,000 house.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it was a $400,000 house. Mr.Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, with respect to the nationalpicture, we don't have any serious difference with the Greenbookforecast. This time again, as has been said around the table, that[forecast] depends greatly upon the turnaround in our net exportposition; absent that we would expect a still positive rate of growthbut more in the 1 to 1-1/2 percent range. So it's extremely importantthat we get that kind of turnaround to achieve 3 percent growth in thenext five quarters.With regard to the District economy, not a great deal haschanged. We still have the unbalanced condition that Gary Sterndescribed in his District of the urban versus the rural areas. Urban-20-11/5/86areas seem to be doing very well with the exception of the oil patchcities; Oklahoma City and Tulsa still are very depressed, but othercities such as Denver and Kansas City, or even Omaha, are moving alongat fairly good clips--particularly the Kansas City area.Manufacturing in the District is very mixed. Auto production--and weare fairly large in auto assembly within the District--is moving alongat a full two-shift operation. The rumor that we have heard is thatinstead of 12 GM plants closing it's only 6 and at least one is in theKansas City area. However, the offset to that is that there is a verylarge plant being constructed now in Kansas City; so it may involvejust an upgrading of their plant facilities, as far as our localeconomy is concerned. Interestingly enough, the high-tech sector,particularly the chip industry in Kansas City and in Denver, seems tohave an uptick and that is largely attributed to the relationship ofthe dollar. The strengthening seems to have come about even thoughtheir competition was, among others, Taiwan. Although thatrelationship hasn't changed, apparently they feel that they are backin competition again where they were priced out of competition at anearlier time. With regard to other manufacturing sectors--such asfarm equipment and oil field equipment--those are still verydepressed, largely because of the agricultural situation.With regard to agriculture, net farm income will beessentially the same as it was last year. But breaking that down, thered meat sector--I'm talking about hogs and beef prices--has been verygood. With the low commodity feed prices they have an all-time goodspread; so there is money being made in that. That's being usedlargely to service some of the agricultural debt and hopefully it willbuy a little more time. In the farm sector, we just completed ourthird-quarter survey and two things fall out of that. One is that thedecline in agricultural [land] prices continues. The second quartershowed a decrease in agricultural real estate values of about 2percent and that continues in the third-quarter survey, as contrastedwith a decline of 6 to 7 percent in the fourth quarter of 1985. Sothe decline is slowing and, hopefully, we are getting at or near thebottom. The other important number that falls out of that survey ofagricultural banks is the fact that the loan-to-deposit ratio is thelowest that it has been since our survey started in 1976. That is, itis now resting at a 52 percent loan-to-deposit ratio in agriculturalbanks. That's largely attributed to the fact that there is a lot ofliquidity but there are no good agricultural loans that they can find;as a result, they are sitting with that liquidity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Angell.MR. ANGELL. I think the most unusual development is that wehaven't had anyone around the table who has taken exception with thestaff's inflation forecast. This is the first time that I rememberthat someone hasn't suggested that inflation is going to be higherthan the staff forecast. That may be good news if that is sharedaround the producers; it may very well be that we don't have thosedeflationary and disinflationary forces that may depress the economy.I am getting somewhat optimistic because even though I have stayedwith a 2-1/2 percent [forecast] in regard to real growth, it isgetting close enough to the staff's forecast that I see very littledifference. It seems to me that our economy is rather recessionresistant in the sense that the proportion of population of elderly--retired with social security and retirement income--is kind of a nice11/5/86floor. Farm programs do provide a safety net, and certainly, theservice sector tends to produce income flows to a large portion of theU.S. economy that tends to make it not too susceptible to a dramaticdownturn. Certainly, there have been no indications of any inventoryaccumulation based upon price expectations, and so there is verylittle danger of any typical inventory-lagged kind of recession. I dothink there is quite a bit of risk, of course, of those sectors thatthe staff is forecasting to increase just matching in very nicely withthose that may have been decreasing. So there has to be some risk ofthat [not] occurring. But I would be at a loss to suggest which waythe risk is the greatest. It would seem to me that if we avoid anydramatic alterations in the money growth path downward--. You know,we have been running Ml at a 16 percent path and I think we all findit surprising to look back and see that. If we had it to do overagain I am not sure we would have chosen a lower [path], given the wayvelocity turned out; but if there is any downside risk, it might showup in a rather quick change from a 16 percent growth path to a 6percent growth path. If that were to occur, we ought to look at that.I don't know whether it is occurring or not; I think there might besome evidence as one might expect. We are getting to nearly threemonths without a discount rate cut and that's almost unheard of thisyear; probably in that environment we might expect the M1 growth pathto show a change. The leading indicator that I run says that may behappening. So it seems to me that we do have a fairly good outlook.I agree with Roger Guffey that the meat producing segment ofthe farm economy, which at times can account for half of net farmincome, has profit margins or spreads that are about the best we haveseen. Even though we haven't seen a trend toward higher numbers, thefeedlot operators know how to keep them in the lots a little longerand have them go at higher rates; consequently, we do have someopportunity for some good food price news, perhaps with regard to somecontinued downward news in poultry and hogs and finally beef prices.Let me end by suggesting that all is not well on the price front: Ithink we have a danger. I think it's quite likely that the Presidentwill receive on his desk a trade bill before next spring has passedand I think that might pose the first warning sign of a danger on theinflation front.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I feel pretty comfortable about thestaff's longer-run forecast, despite the fact that we are seeing anaging of the expansion of the economy over the next year. I amsomewhat less comfortable about the short-range forecast--that is,over this current quarter and the next quarter, largely because therate of growth that we are expecting is highly dependent oninventories and net exports. And that, of course, [unintelligible]for a fairly chancy outcome. I certainly agree with Wayne that thereare a lot of other sectors in the economy that are components of theGNP. So I think that at this time we are forced back more than usualon the anecdotal evidence. I am encouraged by what I hear around thetable that basically the feelings and the mood are good and/or better;chances are much greater that we will see some improvement in theshort run, over the next couple of quarters, than no improvement. Butthis is a time when I think we just have to sit back and wait to seewhat will happen.-22-11/5/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else have any comments?MR. HELLER. Well, I agree broadly with the views expressedby the staff and by the speakers around the table. In particular, Ithink three developments are very heartening. First, the reduction inthe federal imbalance--and if you take the state and local intogether, the deficit is down to just slightly over $110 billion.Second, the external sector imbalance is being reduced. And third,the agricultural and oil-patch situation [seems to be] bottoming out.So, overall, I think we are seeing a strong reduction in thestructural imbalances here. And I think that all bodes well for thesuccess of the staff forecast.MR. JOHNSON. I don't have much to add. I think just abouteverything has been said. The staff forecast is looking better andbetter. The latest evidence is consistent with the pickup in exports,though it may be too early yet for that to be conclusive. But I dothink that the anecdotal [evidence] and some of the aggregate numbersare consistent with the staff forecast, so I feel fairly comfortablewith that. It comes just in the nick of time, really. Some of theimproved aggregate statistics on the trade side along with both theproposed change in fiscal policy and the drop in the discount rate inJapan were timed well. I think [those developments] relieved a lot ofthe concern building in the financial markets about what was going tohappen to the dollar, what kind of pressures that was going to bringon us, and whether the economy was going to remain weak. All of thathas led to some relief in the financial markets. You can almost seeit; you can see it in some flattening of the yield curve. I think wehave a little more breathing room now and I feel a little lesspressured than I did last time looking at this situation. Still, Ithink it is too early to pass judgment on whether we are out of thewoods. But certainly, the evidence is consistent with the projectionthat we have, so I feel better.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of commentsabout the international situation. This was not stated when we werediscussing Japan and Germany earlier. So far as Japan is concerned,the most important point to make about their recent actions,particularly the discount rate change--which is good news, I guess--isthat undoubtedly they acted because they are really worried abouttheir business outlook now. That's the bad news. I don't think theJapanese economy has looked very good for some time, but the Bank ofJapan seems to be convinced that it's not very good and that thegrowth prospects at the moment are not very satisfactory. Mr. Trumanjust gave me the announcement of German industrial production inSeptember; the figures just came out this morning, I guess. I don'tknow what to make of it; it's a big reduction when the August figure,which was initially .3, is revised down to -.1 and then it's -1.7 inSeptember. That gives a rather sick cast to their industrialproduction. They accompanied the announcement with a statement thatthey expect an upward revision of close to 2 percent. I don't knowwhat kind of statistics they have [when they realease a figure thatis] down 1.7 and say they expect it to be revised upward by 2 percent.So think of that what you would like to think. Even with that upwardrevision it would not be very strong in the third quarter; it doesn'tquite bear out these much happier GNP figures they have. I thoughtthat Governor Heller or Governor Angell might mention a littlecuriosity--I don't know whether it's literally true, but it's very11/5/86close to being true--that despite all of this agony in the farmsector, which is very real, we may have record net farm income thisyear. It's a little odd to have all of this agony at the same timethat you have record income, which will almost all be funded bygovernment payments. For whatever reason, there it is. If you don'thave any debts on the farm, I guess you are doing all right.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, on Japan: Aren't their exports stillincreasing?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They think the export orders are actuallydown.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, their exports are down. The last couple ofmonths the volume has actually picked up a bit, but I think that maybe shipping. When volumes are down, then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Volume is down year over year.MR. TRUMAN. The last couple of months they have done alittle better, but basically they are down.MR. RICE. In the last couple of months their trade surplushas increased.MR. TRUMAN. Well, in dollar terms [unintelligible].MR. ANGELL. In dollar terms, but not in yen terms. You see,in yen prices--MR. RICE. Okay.MR. ANGELL. Yen prices are lower and volume is lower, so theyen value of exports is down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, that's what's affecting thedomestic economy as we feared. Besides that, they don't import much.The big contrast between Japan and Germany is that in Germany imports,including imports from Japan, are going up rather sharply. I don'tthink Japanese imports are going up much.MR. HELLER. Domestic demand in Germany is much better thanin Japan. That's the big difference. And investment too[unintelligible]--MR. JOHNSON. How much of that is based on the oil price, andis it going to level off?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson just mentioned thischange in the dollar and so forth. I have a better feeling for themoment; I don't know how long it will last. In some sense it gives usa little more flexibility; we may not want to use it, but it removesone constraint on our fine tuning as we go along. Right at themoment, I'm kind of on this [unintelligible] curve. I can't refrainfrom saying that there are two things that bother me, looking at alonger-term prospective, that are particularly relevant to what we donow. I am struck, particularly [by the comments of] the first peoplewho were talking, that we are doing much better on wages. Mr. Prell-24-11/5/86and other people tell us that it really has been quite remarkable.Productivity in manufacturing, at least, seems to be pretty good.They are keeping their costs under control and everybody says all ofthese manufacturers are sitting there champing at the bit to raiseprices. They can't do it, but at the first opportunity that comesalong they are going to raise prices. I just wonder about theconsistency of these things and what they tell us about the psychologyof the American business sector. You have twenty years of inflation,that's normal; and if you can't raise prices that's not normal, evenif you are making production gains and keeping your costs undercontrol. There seems to be something the matter there. Then I hearabout all of these capacity cutbacks--I don't want to generalize toofar, maybe it's just in orders on steel--but if we are going to havethese high exports in the future and we are going to have theserestrained imports that we are talking about, presumably that meansmanufacturing activity does a lot better in the United States. Iwould think some of that improvement in the trade balance has to comein the automobile industry. And if that's true, what are we doingreducing plants by 6 or 12 or whatever it is [unintelligible]increasing them, may be [unintelligible]. But it bothers me.MR. MELZER. One of the things that I failed to mention isthat a big plant, a new plant, in Westfield that doesn't run a thirdshift has very efficient [unintelligible]. In a downtown truck plantthat is closing, 2,000 or 2,500 laborers might get laid off and thisother facility expects to pick up as many as 2,000 of those. So,maybe there is some of that going on.MR. KEEHN. It is a capacity shift as opposed to necessarilya capacity reduction. The plants I mentioned clearly are older andoutmoded; it is a way of trimming them as opposed to making a veryfundamental, huge reduction [in capacity].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You think in the context of at leastmaintaining production?MR. KEEHN. Well, I think they will reduce their productionbut not in the magnitude that the numbers would suggest. As Rogersays, they are adding a plant in Kansas City. They are right; thereare a number of plants where they can add a second and third shift topick up the production.MR. PRELL. Over the next few years foreign car producers aregoing to have substantial amounts of added capacity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much does that amount to?MR. PRELL. It seems to me that I have seen figures that byearly 1990 it will be 1 million units a year; that's a vaguerecollection.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One place I suppose we can make gains inthat connection is that a lot of these foreign plants wereestablished, I am sure, with the intention of importing almost all thecomponents. But if an American company can get in there and providemore of the components--which seems possible--you get a pickup almostinvisibly this time.11/5/86MR. PRELL. Some of them are creating their own parts-producing facilities.MR. ANGELL. Well, I think it's important to realize thatwhat's in the bag is a cessation of the worsening of our tradebalance. That is going to show up in the GNP numbers rathersubstantially just because we have stopped worsening our position.But it remains to be seen whether in a sense we are substantiallynarrowing that trade deficit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This forecast has pretty big increases inexports and no increases in imports. And that surely is a change intrend, if it comes about.MS. SEGER. Getting to the plant closings: if you look at thedetails I think you will find that they are not all assembly plants.There is a foundry; there are parts plants, etc. And the grim news isthat as they close, they will be importing some of those items that GMnow produces in Saginaw, Michigan, and so forth.MR. ANGELL. But the point of it is that there is outsourcingin the United States as well as outsourcing abroad. A lot of this isoutsourcing right out of the boundaries.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we hear from Mr. Kohn and thenhave our break?MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, let's have a break.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's get the show on the road. Who wouldlike to take an initiative?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd like to take an initiative notto take an initiative.MR. BOEHNE. How about no change?MR. ANGELL. Ditto.MR. JOHNSON. I would not mind suggesting one little nuance.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Is this in the nature of an "ooze"or what?MS. SEGER. Stampede.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will take it that this affirmation of nochange means no change in the borrowing and presumably in the numbersthat we use, although there is a little question as to whether weshould move those. I don't think it makes any difference in thenumbers if we move the time frame to the fourth quarter instead offrom August. I am indifferent, but it's somewhat more normal to usethe fourth-quarter figure. That would not make any difference in the11/5/86numbers; it just affects the words. Forgetting about the nuances inthe language at this point, is that what we are talking about? Okay.The floor is open for nuances.MR. JOHNSON. The nuance I had in mind is that since the lastFOMC meeting perhaps conditions have changed sufficiently to take theasymmetry out of our wording and either leave it totally symmetric orshift the nuance to the other side. It would be fine with me if wemade it totally symmetric, but I have a slight preference for shiftingthe nuance the other way. I think we ought to change that nuance andthat's about all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can we put on the table taking out atleast--MR. JOHNSON. Take out "would" and use "might."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right; make them both "mights" orshift the "would" to the easier reserves part.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, even though "would/might" soundslike some kind of obnoxious insect such as a tick, I would still liketo keep our "would/might."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what is the feeling about symmetry?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I can go along with symmetry.MR. BOEHNE. Symmetry.MR. ANGELL. I would prefer symmetry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it sounds like a consensus forsymmetry. Should these be "woulds" or "mights"?MR. ANGELL. "Woulds."MR. BLACK. Yes, I agree with that.MR. JOHNSON. No, "mights."MR. ANGELL. No. Symmetry would be "woulds."MR. JOHNSON. I guess it doesn't matter as long as we use thesame word on both sides.MR. BLACK. This is going to be a long meeting.MR. ANGELL. Well, this is a very significant issue.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have any strong feeling either[way], but I'd suggest "might" as being slightly more [appropriate]; Idon't hear anybody talking about wanting to change now in a veryactive sense. Mr. Kohn raised a question about whether we want tochange "slightly" to "somewhat." Any preference between "slightly"and "somewhat"?MR. GUFFEY. I think it's "slightly."-27-11/5/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the same theory you would make it"might" - -VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "Might" is consistent with"slightly."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What about these [proposed] changes thatMr. Kohn made? On the first reading I don't see that they changeanything: change "exceptionally large increase" to "exceptional pace;"and "past" to "previous." What is--MR. KOHN. The point was that the way it read before itwasn't clear over what period the Committee was expecting Ml tomoderate. [The question was]: as compared to what? So I tried, byputting "over the same period" to convey that it was the August-to-December or the September-to-December period compared to "over thesummer."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you see more of a difference between"previous" and "past" than I do. Since I see no substantivedifference between them, I guess it just raises the question ofwhether it's worth changing the language.MR. HELLER. Oh, "previous" is slightly clearer, isn't it?Because "the past" would include the months in the period that he wastalking about earlier.MR. BOEHNE. Do you want "previous might" or "would be"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [For] September to December I think itmakes absolutely no difference, since we had it this way, with"exceptional." It would make just a slight substantive difference ifwe thought the higher end of this range in September [unintelligible].August to December means it includes August too.MR. KOHN. No, it's from an August base; so it would beSeptember, October, November.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So the difference is whether you includeSeptember and September was toward the high side. If the figures camein low you have a month of high [growth] that would be in thecalculations.MR. KOHN. Look on page 6, Mr. Chairman. For alternative B,the August-to-December growth we have is 8.4 percent for M2 and 7.4percent for M3. For September-to-December growth we have the samething for M2, so that's no difference at all; but it's slightly lowerfor M3. A range of 7 to 9 percent would do for both.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's just a matter of presentation.Usually in these mid-quarterly dates we talk about the quarter and notabout a period longer than a quarter. Before the quarter this time wedid add August; as we sometimes do, we included an extra month. Whatdo you want to do?MR. ANGELL. Use the September.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to change to September?-28-11/5/86MR. JOHNSON. Yes, that's all right.MR. ANGELL. I would like to make a case: If the monetaryaggregates came in exceptionally weak, I would hope it would not be a"slight" and a "might."MR. HELLER. I actually disagree with you a little on thatone. I think we should look forward to the time when the monetaryaggregates would slow down.MR. ANGELL. Well, we should. But how abruptly?MR. JOHNSON. If we are continuing to get a good tighteconomy--MR. MORRIS. Well, as long as you are not driving interestrates [up] at the same time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have anything to say?It would read: "In the implementation of policy the Committee seeks tomaintain the existing degree of reserve restraint. This action isexpected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the periodfrom September to December at annual rates of 7 to 9 percent. Whilegrowth in Ml over the same period is expected to moderate from"--we'lltake these refinements; that will produce a whole article in the FedFortnightly.MR. BLACK. Don't you have to take out "respectively," Mr.Chairman?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we took out "respectively." It's 7to 9 percent. "While growth in M1 over the same period is expected tomoderate from its exceptional pace during the previous several months,growth in this aggregates will continue to be judged in the light ofthe behavior of M2 and M3 and other factors. Slightly greater reserverestraint might or slightly lesser reserve reserve might beacceptable" etc. And we have 4 to 8 percent on the federal fundsrate. Any other comments?MR. GUFFEY. I think we ought to take a vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we are prepared, we can take a vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesGovernor Heller YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a couple of housekeeping items. Ithought we might meet for two days in December [unintelligible] in thediscussion of how we handle next year. That, of course, raises not-29-11/5/86 -30-exactly a new event but a considerable question about what we do aboutMl in particular. So if that's all right we will schedule the meetingto begin on Monday afternoon instead of on Tuesday. Also, I think youhave had a tentative schedule of next year's meetings. The onlyquestion I am aware of that has arisen is that a couple of peopleraised a question about the meeting scheduled during Christmas week.I would like to indicate that we work during [unintelligible].END OF MEETING