
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Conditions in the Fourth District have improved notably since our last meeting, as was described in some detail in our latest Beige Book report.
Consumer spending and housing remained buoyant, and now a broader mix of business persons are willing to express satisfaction with their profitability and their order books.
Nevertheless, those I talk to remain cautious about their capital spending plans and are still tentative about hiring plans.
I get a lot of questions from business people in our District about where this 8.2 percent growth is occurring because they just don’t see it.
I suspect that the Fourth District is going to be one of the laggards as this economywide expansion extends into the next year.
December 9, 200360 of 133Although the media like to report on the manufacturing sector as if it’s some type of one-dimensional animal, the performance in that sector has been quite mixed.
Certainly there are differences among companies due to the manufacturing sub-industry in which they operate since some sub-industries are experiencing stronger demand than others.
Defense-related industry is the most obvious example.
However, small firms that supply components to larger companies are having an extraordinarily difficult time in the current environment.
These small firms typically buy raw materials in world markets, and they have no bargaining power over the prices they pay.
Their final customers can source components, even custommade parts on world markets as well, and those customers are forcing the component suppliers to compete against one another strictly on spot prices.
The result is that the component suppliers are being squeezed from both sides.
An example of this in my District was related to me by a contact whose firm makes a variety of small rubber parts.
He sells those parts to larger companies that are producing automobiles, computers, and consumer goods.
One of his customers recently asked him to reduce his price for a component from $1.15 to $.40.
If that price request could not be met, the customer said he was going to have to take his business offshore.
My contact couldn’t produce the component at that price so he went offshore and found a producer who could.
He then was able to sell this part to his customer for $.38 apiece, just slightly under the $.40 price requested.
The part costs my contact $.09 plus $.05 shipping, so he’s still making a profit.
I find two aspects of this story noteworthy.
<START>The first is that my contact, when asked to reduce his price, thought the product could not be made at that price.<END>
But he found that it could be produced offshore with technology that he didn’t even know existed.
He was unaware of the technology until he visited the shop floor and actually saw that technology being used.
So it wasn’t labor December 9, 200361 of 133cost that was driving down the price but the technology being used offshore.
The second aspect that I find interesting is that many large U.S.
manufacturing companies are now depending on inexpensive offshore sourcing to keep their own products competitive.
So if there are disruptions in the relations with emerging economies, that is going to help some U.S.
industries but will hurt many others.
Collectively these circumstances suggest to me that we are still in the process of adjusting to the globalization in trade that is occurring and that the adjustment process is going to last for some time.
Again, I don’t think I will be surprised to learn that this adjustment process is altering some of the economic relationships that we have used in the past as guideposts, such as measures of capacity and its utilization.
I think it’s clear that international trade and productivity patterns have been instrumental in driving down prices of both goods and services, especially manufactured consumer products.
CPI goods prices are still falling and by enough arithmetically to hold the overall core rate of inflation at a low level.
In fact, as we’ve discussed extensively this morning, inflation rates are somewhat lower than various estimates of expected inflation.
As has been reported in the media lately, some Wall Street economists think that we’re trying to communicate that we want the inflation rate to move up about 100 basis points from where it is today.
Others seem to think that our statements are designed simply to communicate something about the amount of slack that we see remaining in the economy through the next year.
This confusion leads me to want to be a bit cautious about changing our communications significantly at this meeting.
<START>It reinforces to me, though, that we need to be clear about our intentions and I am looking forward to our discussions next month, which I hope will help us communicate more effectively to the public in that regard.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Let’s take a break and be back in ten minutes.
December 9, 200362 of 133[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
First Vice President Lyon, please.
Welcome, incidentally.
MR.
LYON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Overall for the current quarter economic conditions have continued to improve in the Ninth District.
This improvement is attributable primarily to continued strength in residential real estate markets, an uptick in manufacturing, a modest increase in consumption, and an improved agricultural picture.
Other sectors
—including commercial real estate, mining, and energy
—are holding steady.
There are no reports of significant increases in prices or wages.
I’ll have a little more to say about wages and prices in a minute, but first and perhaps most important, it appears that labor markets have stabilized.
One of our Minnesota directors noted recently that for the first time in a number of months none of his contacts had plans to decrease jobs at their companies.
He did add, however, that employers he spoke with were still cautious about hiring additional employees.
Next week we’ll announce the results of our annual Ninth District business survey.
Preliminary results show that 34 percent of the respondents expect to increase employment at their firms in 2004, whereas 16 percent plan to reduce jobs over the coming year.
<START>If the stories we’re hearing from our directors are any indication, some of the job losses will be due to outsourcing and the movement of operations overseas.<END>
Other anecdotal information we’ve received lately reflects a similar moderately optimistic tone.
For example, business conditions in the information technology sector are reportedly improving, albeit slowly.
And some business expansion was noted, including by a telecommunications firm in southwestern Wisconsin and a window manufacturer in Minnesota.
<START>Agricultural conditions appear favorable, with a solid grain harvest and high cattle prices bringing mostly good news from our Agricultural Advisory Council<END>
—a relatively rare event.
December 9, 200363 of 133According to our advisers, this good news for agricultural producers is creating positive spillover effects in rural communities.
<START>Returning to the question of wage and price increases, according to our recent business poll, almost 80 percent of respondents expect wages at businesses in their communities to increase between 2 and 3 percent.<END>
Only 4 percent of the respondents predict that wages will grow 4 percent or more.
At the same time, respondents report significant productivity increases this year and plan to increase capital investment in 2004.
Lastly, more than half the respondents predict that prices for their products and services will remain unchanged, whereas 30 percent expect price increases next year.
Turning to the national outlook, there are many indications that the solid expansion will continue over the next several quarters.
Firms are hiring again, payroll employment has increased in each of the past four months, and hours worked are up sharply.
Initial claims for employment benefits have been generally declining, and the unemployment rate has fallen slightly.
The weak manufacturing sector appears to be turning up.
While consumer spending has slowed, data on orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods indicate that last quarter’s rebound in business spending on equipment and software is continuing into the current quarter.
Further, residential construction continues to be quite strong.
There are also indications that real growth in foreign economies is picking up, which should improve exports.
<START>We are optimistic about the performance of the real economy next year, but we’re not quite as optimistic as the Greenbook.<END>
<START>Moreover, we see weaker growth in employment and hours worked and stronger growth in productivity next year than the Board staff does.<END>
With respect to inflation, we’re also somewhat less optimistic than the Greenbook.
We see headline rates of inflation either unchanged or modestly higher over the next few quarters.
This view is December 9, 200364 of 133based both on our models and on recent movements in market interest rates.
We see core inflation rates remaining roughly at current levels.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think we all could agree that the shift in sentiment around the table across almost all the Districts has been one of the more unusual changes in a positive direction that we’ve seen in a very long time.
I think it provides us with further confirmation that we don’t have to rewrite the textbooks, at least the standard new Keynesian ones.
<START>In the absence of downward shocks, massive amounts of fiscal and monetary stimulus interacting with the natural resilience of the economy will boost demand and put the economy on a track on which output is growing faster than potential.<END>
To my mind the global character of the strengthening in demand is particularly noteworthy in that it suggests a broad base for improving economic conditions.
We’ve had positive surprises, as Karen noted, almost everywhere in the world
—even in economies in the euro area that aren’t especially resilient and where fiscal policy isn’t that expansionary.
To some extent this is a reflection of the strength in the U.S.
economy, but I think domestic demand has picked up in many countries, responding in part to widespread expansionary monetary policies.
<START>And with our exchange rate falling, greater worldwide demand should show through at least to less leakage from U.S.<END>
production than we might otherwise have expected from strong U.S.
demand going forward.
The upward revisions to central tendency forecasts for both output and inflation
—and just as importantly the substantial reduction in the downside risks around those forecasts
—should make us considerably more confident about the outlook than we were a few months ago.
December 9, 200365 of 133It seems likely that the economy will grow rapidly enough to begin to erode slack and that inflation will hold near current levels instead of moving substantially lower.
The continuing surge in capital spending and the pickup in hiring suggest a rebound in business confidence that is unlikely to fade quickly.
In the household sector, housing demand has remained strong even after the earlier rise in long-term interest rates.
Other household spending hasn’t fallen back and may have risen modestly further even as the effects of tax rebate checks and the earlier surge in mortgage refinancing wear off.
Private domestic demand for the third quarter was revised up 1 percentage point, and this revision doesn’t seem to be borrowing from the immediate future.
Incoming data have led the staff to add another ¾ percentage point to private domestic demand in the fourth quarter.
In financial markets, greater confidence continues to be reflected in the persistent erosion of risk premiums, especially on lower-rated issuers, and in rising equity prices.
Taken together with the falling dollar and stable Treasury bond rates, these developments indicate that financial conditions are becoming more accommodative even as the faster economic expansion takes hold.
<START>On the inflation front, the declining dollar and stable inflation expectations should provide a counterweight to continuing, if eroding, output gaps to stem the drop of inflation.<END>
I agree with the rest of you that the risks of pernicious deflation, which never were very large, have almost disappeared.
But in my view some downward risk to the overall outlook for inflation remains.
The major unknown is productivity, where I suspect there is a greater possibility of an upward than a downward surprise relative to the pattern of slowing productivity growth in the staff forecast.
<START>Faster productivity growth, if it is not a consequence of capital deepening, could slow the decline in the output gap and could put further downward pressure on prices, especially if it comes more quickly than anticipated increases in worker compensation.<END>
<START>December 9, 200366 of 133Partly for this reason, the shift in the balance of risks around achieving our objectives for output and prices does not call for a change in policy any time soon in my view.<END>
Moreover, what hasn’t changed in the United States is the cost of missing to one side or another of these forecasts.
<START>Inflation is low and, as many of you remarked, close to the lower edge of our price stability comfort zones.<END>
And output gaps remain sizable.
<START>Shortfalls from expectations for output and prices would have a greater deleterious effect on welfare than overshoots, including an overshoot that results in a small rise in inflation down the road.<END>
<START>So we should continue to take our risks on the easy side of policy.<END>
But policy is quite easy, quite stimulative.
<START>We got here by aggressive easing to deal with the threat of deflation and the zero bound, and in the unusual circumstances that we faced last spring and summer, we reinforced that stance in market expectations by our “considerable period” terminology.<END>
As the threats recede, we need to be thinking about whether we have the flexibility to react if upside risks materialize or even if the economy evolves as expected.
A zero real funds rate may not be way out of line for a 2 percent output gap, but it would be unusual to keep the funds rate that low as the output gap is closing next year.
We can see this in the various versions of the Taylor rule, which all point to higher rates next year.
<START>This was a feature of Governor Bernanke’s presentation last time and is even more so in the calculations using updated actual and forecasted values for output and inflation gaps.<END>
<START>Taylor rules are just rough benchmarks, and I would not argue that we ought to follow them in any mechanical way.<END>
But these results do underline the questions about how we position ourselves going forward.
I look forward to the next part of the meeting to a discussion of how in our announcement we can acknowledge a shifting balance of risks and begin the process of ensuring for ourselves sufficient flexibility to react to potential changes in circumstances.
December 9, 200367 of 133CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You’ll find that we’re fairly close to the center of gravity in this discussion.
Let me start with the greater New York region in the Second District, where we see growing signs of strength, most notably in the financial and the business investment sectors.
Early results from our forthcoming December Empire Survey
—I don’t think “Empire” refers to the imperial New York Fed
—[laughter] show widespread improvement in business conditions.
A rising proportion of firms
—higher than the already high number in November
—reported increases in employment and in the workweek.
Notably, the December survey shows strong expectations for higher prices paid and received six months ahead.
The Securities Industry Association, as you may have read, projects that bonuses will be up 20 percent from a year ago.
<START>The leaders of the financial community in New York generally express growing confidence in the strength of the recovery, though they cite varying degrees of concern about strategic or terrorism risk, about the caution induced by legal and corporate governance accounting uncertainties, about the nation’s external imbalance, its fiscal deficit trajectory, and about what one might call a modest erosion in the credibility premium that the U.S.<END>
financial system in some sense has enjoyed.
For the U.S.
economy as a whole, we are encouraged by the breadth of the strength in recent data and by signs, of course, that policy works.
<START>With consumer spending recently strong, the initial signs of growth in employment, the strong response in capital spending, and low levels of inventories, we feel more confident that the foundations have been laid for a sustained expansion.<END>
<START>Our forecast shows somewhat less confidence in the strength of consumption and in the pace of employment growth than does the Greenbook, and we show a modestly higher December 9, 200368 of 133negative contribution from the external sector.<END>
But overall, we think the evidence supports the view that the economy is growing at a reasonably healthy pace and will do so over the forecast period at a strong enough level to begin to absorb the available slack.
<START>These factors and the initial signs regarding prices suggest a more balanced inflation outlook.<END>
<START>The extent of the remaining slack in the economy, the slow pace at which we expect it to be absorbed, and the strength of productivity growth all suggest little basis for concern that inflation will rise appreciably in the coming year.<END>
<START>Yet the dollar’s decline, the run-up in commodity prices, and the rise in some measures of inflation expectations suggest that the risk of further declines in key price series has diminished.<END>
It’s important to note that we face a fair degree of uncertainty over many of the key elements of this recovery.
Consumption may decelerate more than we anticipate, as the force of tax changes and monetary stimulus fade.
The strength of underlying growth may surprise us still and with that may come more modest job growth.
The confidence necessary to sustain strong business investment could still falter.
<START>Growth in Europe and Japan still looks very slow, even if the downside risks have diminished.<END>
Emerging Asia is, of course, very strong, and there are better numbers across most emerging markets.
But many emerging economies remain very vulnerable, with very large balance sheet exposures, weak institutions, and political systems very open to populist pressure.
<START>The scale of dollar reserve accumulation and the exchange rate regimes that support that demand for dollars seem unlikely to be sustained indefinitely.<END>
The combination of the sheer magnitude of our external imbalance and the size of the gap in potential growth between the U.S.
<START>and other major economies will leave us exposed to considerable risk in financial markets, with potential cliffs for the dollar and a sharper rise in interest rates.<END>
<START>These risks and the troubling December 9, 200369 of 133fiscal trajectory mean that monetary policy will carry a greater burden for sustaining confidence in U.S.<END>
financial assets.
The extent of the decline in credit spreads and the magnitude of opportunities for the development of leveraged positions combined with the large scale of the mortgage-backed market mean that we have to be attentive to the risks that will come from a sustained period of low rates and to the forces that will be unleashed as its end approaches.
This requires careful attention, though it’s not clear what that really means for the policy judgments ahead.
<START>On balance, we see the prospect of stronger real growth and a higher underlying rate of potential growth, and we have greater confidence about a more benign inflation outlook.<END>
We’re approaching a point at which we need to consider how to move to a more neutral, less accommodating, policy stance.
We will have time and perhaps reason to begin that discussion in the New Year, probably sooner than we had thought would be necessary.
I’ll wait for the discussion on policy and our press statement to address those interesting questions.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It can be very frustrating when one’s intuition does not square with the results of one’s models.
College football has this problem right now.
<START>[Laughter] It should be obvious to everybody that USC is the best team, but when the model builders try to develop a system that weighs whom each team beats, the strength of opponents on the schedule, and other variables, they get the wrong answer.<END>
I can see a similar problem coming up for us, if not today then fairly soon.
Compared with most of 2003, the economy seems clearly to have turned.
Almost every forecaster is now quite optimistic, and for two months the data have consistently exceeded expectations.
Even Friday’s labor report, viewed as lukewarm, could be interpreted as fairly December 9, 200370 of 133strong with the rise of self-employment and the rise in hours.
<START>And the slight decline in manufacturing employment coupled with strong manufacturing productivity implies a sharp rise in industrial production.<END>
Given all this and given my feeling that at the previous turning point, November 2000, the FOMC may have been a bit slow to recognize a downturn, it is important that we stay ahead of the curve.
<START>It is way too soon to start raising rates, but it may not be too soon to change some of our rhetoric and even go toward a neutral bias.<END>
That’s what my intuition says.
<START>As for the models, let me use the output and inflation building blocks the way the Bluebook does in the chart on page 10.<END>
For the output side, the staff forecast shows an economy clearly pointed in the right direction.
Over the next few quarters, growth should proceed at a rate that exceeds the trend level, enough to be ultimately consistent with maximum sustainable employment.
Note the familiar words.
<START>There are both upside and downside risks, of course, but overall output risks seem balanced.<END>
On the inflation side things get trickier.
My own preferred target range for core PCE inflation, for which I cited my reasoning in a speech I gave a few weeks ago, is from 1 to 2½ percent.
By that standard, inflation is now near the bottom of the target range.
Will it increase or decrease?
On the one side, output gaps are large, imparting downward pressure.
On the other side, output growth is rapid, imparting upward pressure if there are speed limit effects.
To compare these pressures, one can first look at historical data.
In the early 1980s we had almost exactly the same situation, large output gaps and rapid growth.
Inflation definitely fell in that episode, as Dave Stockton noted earlier.
Another place to look is at price–cost margins.
These are currently very high, leading to an expectation that price growth could be soft.
A third place to look is at the staff regressions explaining prices or wages or both.
As usual, the staff has December 9, 200371 of 133lots and lots of regression models.
All of them have strong negative gap effects;
some have zero speed limit effects;
and others have small and generally insignificant speed limit effects.
Rapid growth does seem to drive up commodity prices but not overall prices or wages, at least not very much.
<START>The clear verdict here is that output gaps impart powerful downward forces on inflation whereas speed limits impart weak upward forces.<END>
This means that inflation should be more likely to decline than to rise.
This, by the way, is essentially the argument that the Wall Street Journal this morning criticized Governors Ferguson and Bernanke for making.
<START>If the Wall Street Journal editorial page criticizes an argument, there must be some merit to it!<END>
<START>[Laughter] Since core inflation is already near the bottom of my preferred range and is more likely to drop than increase, that should show up as a negative bias for the inflation term.<END>
A negative for inflation and a neutral for output should lead to an overall negative.
But my intuition suggests that the overall bias should be neutral.
That’s the difference between intuitions and models.
How to resolve this?
<START>One possibility, as Dave mentioned earlier, involves some of the upside risks on inflation coupled with the foreign exchange risk that we mentioned and the oil price risk the Chairman mentioned.<END>
Another possibility is that, although the inflation bias is still negative, it is moving toward neutrality, as is the overall bias.
Whatever the case, I think we ought to start preparing the world.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, the Tenth District economy is similar to the District economies others have described in that it continues to expand and has done so fairly clearly since our last meeting.
Businesses are showing some real confidence that the recovery now is going to sustain itself.
December 9, 200372 of 133Let me talk just a minute about regional developments.
Our labor markets have indeed firmed since our last meeting.
According to the payroll data, employment rose in October for the second month in a row.
Moreover, layoff announcements have subsided, and hiring announcements have picked up, suggesting that job growth will continue to strengthen further in the coming months.
Manufacturing activity also has expanded.
Production and new orders rose strongly during the last two months, and expectations for future activity have moved higher.
<START>Employment is no longer falling, and for the first time since the slump began, firms in manufacturing appear willing to hire additional workers to meet anticipated increases in demand.<END>
Capital spending also continues to improve, with considerably more firms planning to increase than to reduce investment in the coming months.
Consumer spending looks solid despite reduced stimulus from the tax rebate and the slowdown in mortgage refinancing activity.
Anecdotal reports suggest that the holiday season has gotten off to a good start in our area, particularly in the east side of the region, with stores feeling less need to discount merchandise this year than last year.
Travel and tourism are also doing well, with convention activity continuing strong and ski bookings in the western part of our District running quite high.
Housing activity remains robust.
And though commercial real estate is still in a slump, we’re beginning to hear that the bottom has been reached, at least in the view of our local developers.
Energy activity remains strong.
<START>With respect to inflation, wage pressures are still minimal, but price pressures have increased slightly.<END>
<START>Manufacturers not only expect substantial increases in raw materials prices in the next few months but also anticipate having somewhat more success in passing the cost increases on to the customer.<END>
That’s the anecdotal comments we’re receiving from them.
In agriculture, incomes are up.
They were adjusted up another 6 percent in November.
The only December 9, 200373 of 133fly in the ointment is some of the upsetting information relative to China.
That has affected our agricultural outlook to a small degree.
Let me turn to the national economy.
To repeat what many others have said, recent indicators have been strong and more so than generally expected.
As a result, many people have revised upward their forecasts for growth in 2004.
Overall, I expect growth to be in the 4¼ to 4½ percent range in 2004 and stronger than that
—maybe 4¾ to 5 percent in 2005.
Obviously my forecast is lower than the Greenbook’s but somewhat higher than the December Blue Chip numbers that came in at just under 4 percent.
The reasons for the strong outlook are the same as they have been for some time:
accommodative monetary policy, stimulative financial conditions, cumulative effects of fiscal policy, and strong productivity.
In addition to these, I would add strong forward momentum and improving business confidence as important factors.
Moreover, employment is finally rising, and the unemployment rate is falling.
We also are seeing more signs of recovery in capital spending on a national level, as I’ve heard around the table.
The growth in profits and business fixed investment seen in the last quarter along with strong orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods suggest that the recovery will continue to improve as we move forward.
While there are risks to the outlook, I think they are probably balanced now or on the upside, depending on one’s definition of upside.
At the last meeting I felt, as did others, that there was a fair amount of uncertainty with regard to capital spending and employment.
While risks in those areas perhaps remain, they are clearly much smaller today than just a short time ago at our last meeting.
In addition, the upside surprises we have been seeing may continue as the recovery gains momentum.
December 9, 200374 of 133Let me turn to the inflation outlook.
<START>I take the view that inflation will rise, but I agree with those who say it is likely to increase only slightly, perhaps by ¼ point in 2004 and 2005.<END>
<START>I would add that, while I think the argument that the output gap will tend to hold inflation down is a fair one, I believe the highly accommodative stance of monetary policy in an accelerating economy balances out those deflationary risks.<END>
<START>As it settles out for me, Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that at worst the output risks are balanced.<END>
I think the inflation risks are also balanced.
In my view we really do need to reconsider the last sentence of our statement.
I think we can change the language
—and perhaps at this meeting
—in a way that moves us more toward neutral, with balanced risk assessments, without necessarily upsetting the markets or the mainstream.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A few months ago the nation embarked on an important and interesting experiment in macroeconomics.
<START>Most of us had confidence that the stimulative policies being put in place would have the desired effect, but the timing and the magnitude of that effect were a bit uncertain.<END>
The question was how stimulative the set of fiscal and monetary policy changes might actually be.
The answer today, as many of you have already said, is that the combination of historically low interest rates, the home refinancing boom, and this summer’s tax cut does seem to have succeeded even better than earlier expected.
The incoming data since the last meeting clearly indicate that household consumption and residential investment have remained robust.
Importantly, I think the data indicate that the participation of the business sector through business fixed investment is also starting to become firmer.
In short, as I think the consensus has emerged here, the turnaround seems relatively firmly entrenched.
The Greenbook takes on board the strength of the incoming data by raising the forecast for the December 9, 200375 of 133next year, and I must say that I find the baseline forecast acceptable.
<START>While I suppose there is still a slight possibility of growth stalling out, that prospect is certainly much less palpable than just a few months ago and seems to recede with almost every data release.<END>
<START>With the growth forecast seemingly reasonable, the major question appears to be the risks around the baseline inflation outlook, given the already low level of inflation and the size of the pool of underutilized resources.<END>
I must admit that I concede, as do others, that there are both upside and downside risks around the baseline inflation outlook in the Greenbook.
On the upside, the risk is that the economy will heat up and interest rates will remain inappropriately accommodative for a little too long, allowing inflation expectations to build as in one of the alternative scenarios in the Greenbook.
That scenario is not completely without validation;
inflation compensation has ticked up recently, though the reasons, as we discussed earlier, be subject to some questions.
may And labor compensation may have to play well catch-up if you will, given the fact that wages have lagged the increases in productivity for several quarters now.
On the downside, however, there is some risk that inflation might soften even further from this point.
While there is some validation for the upside risks, I would say that in fact the downside scenario still carries slightly more weight.
Now, we may have underestimated the degree to which trend productivity has increased and overestimated the willingness of businesses to hire new workers.
But the ambiguity, shall we say, of the relative weakness of the most recent employment report compared with both expectations and with earlier reports suggests that we cannot discount this prospect completely.
The steady erosion of unit labor costs, which President Broaddus referred to earlier, and the rise in the markup over unit labor costs also gives some further weight to concern about the downside risk.
<START>Moreover, recent research has shown that, as inflation has been brought down over the past two decades, the sensitivity of prices to the level December 9, 200376 of 133of resource utilization has also fallen.<END>
Consequently, I think the faster structural productivity growth scenario in the Greenbook deserves some attention from this Committee.
All in all, recognizing that the inflation call is much more balanced now than it was even a little while ago and that the risk of a pernicious downward spiral seems to have been removed completely, I would still put admittedly marginally greater weight on the downside inflation risk.
<START>Given the low level of inflation, I hope that when we get to the policy discussion we can give some due regard to the balance of risks in this key area.<END>
Finally, since a few have already raised the question of the last sentence of our statement, I will say that my preference is to move away from it gradually.
As I’ve tried to convey in a couple of other meetings, I think perhaps the best way to do that at this stage is to make it much more conditional and much more closely tied to economic reality as opposed to just to the passage of time.
I won’t go any further into that topic, but I thank you all for your attention.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
I’d like to bring up two points that largely haven’t been talked about here.
The first involves fiscal policy issues.
I’m sure you’ve noticed that the government is being funded at the moment on a continuing resolution.
The House yesterday passed an omnibus budget bill that I think is totally consistent with Greenbook expectations of what that bill would include.
The Senate undoubtedly will not pass a budget bill this year.
The significance of that is that, for the Congress, the Presidential election year starts the first day following their return after the recess.
It will be interesting to see the extent to which budget issues are dealt with;
I have some concerns about it.
The hopeful sign from my perspective is that for the first time since September 11, 2001, we are seeing some concern about fiscal discipline.
You may have noticed that the bill passed yesterday had almost as many Republicans voting against it as Democrats December 9, 200377 of 133voting for it.
I think this country received a free pass for a period of time post–September 11, during which it did not need to maintain the same fiscal discipline that it did for almost the entire decade of the ’90s.
<START>I can’t help but believe that some of the concern about the dollar from foreign investors reflects the seeming lack of concern for fiscal responsibility, particularly when one considers that the most significant legislative accomplishment of this Congress will have almost no budget implications until 2006.<END>
So while I don’t see anything resembling a return to the pay-go spending restrictions in this Congress, it seems to me that at least it will be a campaign issue for the first time since the year 2000.
I hope so anyway.
With respect to how the banking industry has responded in light of the improved economic performance, you may have noticed that the third-quarter results indicated a significant improvement in banking industry profitability.
But it’s a different mix even from six months ago.
Six months ago the improved profit picture was based on fee income and securities transactions.
It is largely this time a result of improved asset quality.
<START>In fact, there was no need for loan-loss provisioning that would indicate any weakness in asset quality.<END>
I think this supports what Dino suggested also
—that we are seeing very strong asset quality.
This means two things to me.
First, the fact that we have not seen any growth yet in commercial lending means that there is still a significant amount of firepower in the banking industry to fund a continuing expansion.
Second, to the extent that there’s a tightening in credit standards, it has nothing to do with the availability of funds.
I think those are two important points.
We do not hear from bankers the same concern now that the economy is not turning around.
There is clear anecdotal evidence that it is, but that hasn’t resulted in increased loan demand up to this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bernanke.
December 9, 200378 of 133MR. BERNANKE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The economic news since our last meeting has been heartening.
The odds that we have begun a strong and sustainable expansion have risen significantly.
Because of the rise in growth, we’re going to see even more op-ed articles, wire stories, and editorials opining that the Fed needs to tighten soon to avoid a repeat of 1980s-style inflation.
The Wall Street Journal today has an editorial along those lines.
<START>I believe these critics are not particularly well informed and that, as a Committee, we should continue to remain patient and not choke off growth unnecessarily.<END>
In particular, though of course we have to be vigilant to detect any change in the inflation trend, the odds of inflation rising significantly any time soon from its current very low level seem small.
Let me make a few points.
First, those on the Street and elsewhere who lately have been worrying about inflation have tended to point primarily to raw materials prices, which have been rising, and to the dollar, which has been falling.
Here I will largely reiterate some things that Dave Stockton said.
The Board staff’s Monday briefing, which I believe has been posted electronically, debunked the importance of the raw materials argument quite convincingly in my view.
The briefing includes a graph of the historical data, which shows that even very large movements of raw materials prices
—which are quite common by the way
<START>—appear to have muted effects on intermediate goods prices and, most important, no discernible effects at all on final goods inflation.<END>
Presumably this lack of inflationary impact reflects the fact that raw materials are only a small part of total costs.
As another figure in the briefing showed, unit labor costs
— which, of course, have been falling rapidly as productivity has surged and wage growth has slowed
<START>—are far more important in inflation determination than are materials prices.<END>
An analysis similar to that for raw materials would apply to the dollar.
As we’ve been seeing, large movements of the dollar against major currencies tend to translate into smaller December 9, 200379 of 133movements against the U.S.
trade-weighted basket of currencies and into still smaller effects on import prices because of imperfect pass-throughs.
Nonoil import prices, in turn, are a relatively modest part of the overall price index.
In short, the ultimate effect of the dollar depreciation of the magnitude we have seen on broad measures of core inflation is likely to be quite small indeed.
I noted the key role of unit labor costs in inflation.
Of course, unit labor costs will not continue to fall at the recent rate.
Indeed, as employment picks up, productivity growth in particular will slow markedly.
<START>Critics may point to this decline in productivity growth as another incipient source of inflationary pressure.<END>
I would just note that this prospective productivity decline is fully incorporated in the Greenbook forecast that we have before us.
In particular, the Greenbook forecast assumes that productivity growth will fall significantly below trend in 2004 and 2005 as employment picks up, specifically to 1.7 percent in 2004 and to only 0.5 percent in 2005.
Given recent experience, it seems entirely possible that these assumptions are conservative and that productivity growth, though decelerating, will nevertheless be higher than what the staff has assumed for the next two years.
If so, that would tend to increase the risks of further disinflation.
Finally, although output gaps are of course very hard to measure, the weight of the evidence continues to support those who believe that considerable slack remains in the economy.
Let me give one bit of evidence on this point.
The recent New York Times article by Chicago economist Austan Goolsbee argued that the rise in the unemployment rate in the past two years understates the degree of labor market weakness.
<START>The reason is that today a large percentage of job losers, a greater fraction than in the past, simply withdraw from the labor force, for example, to apply for Social Security disability benefits.<END>
I looked at data on the ratio of employment to the December 9, 200380 of 133working age population, which combine information on both unemployment and labor force participation and found that they confirm this general observation.
Between its peak in April 2000 and its trough this past September, the employment-to-population ratio fell 2.8 percentage points.
<START>With the strong gains in the household survey of the past two months, the net decline in the employment-to-population ratio since 2000 is still 2.4 percentage points.<END>
For comparison, the combination of the 1980 and 1981-82 recessions, during which the unemployment rate peaked near 11 percent, produced a peak-to-trough move in this ratio between September 1979 and February 1983 of 3.0 percentage points.
The decline attributed to the 1981-82 recession alone from its local peak in April ’81 until February ’83 was 2.5 percentage points.
So on this particular metric
—and of course it’s only one metric
—the deterioration of the labor market from 2000 until now is comparable to what occurred during the deep 1981-82 recession.
For comparison, the movement in the employment-to-population ratio from its peak to its trough during the 1990-91 recession period was 2.0 percentage points.
Possibly the extent of the recent decline is exaggerated because employment was unsustainably high in 1999 and 2000.
However, even relative to a more neutral benchmark of 5 percent unemployment and a participation rate at its long-run trend, current household employment
—the more optimistic of the surveys
—remains some 2.9 million jobs below normal.
That number fully incorporates the rise in self-employment about which much has been made.
On balance, the large decline in the share of the population that is working suggests that employment can rise significantly before we see pressure on wages and unit labor costs.
To summarize, vigilance on inflation is absolutely essential.
I do not disagree with that one bit.
But we should not overreact to purported signs of inflation that are in reality no such thing.
Thank you.
December 9, 200381 of 133CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Since our last meeting the news about economic growth, as many people around the table have already said, is much stronger.
One point I’d note is that I’m very happy to see that growth is more balanced in terms of coming from more sources.
It is no longer relying totally on consumer spending;
business capital investment has resumed.
We continue to be amazed that inventories are still falling, which leaves room for further expansion as inventories get rebuilt to supply sales growth.
Moreover, the international economy is picking up and should support some modest expansion of exports.
As business spending continues to grow, more workers will also be added to payrolls.
That will support consumption and to some extent offset the lower impetus from tax cuts and mortgage refinancing in the future.
<START>When I look at the risk with regard to economic growth<END>
—if the risk is assessed just on the growth rate
—I’d say the risk is on the upside.
However, if we look at the economy’s performance relative to the level of potential output, the gap is significant.
As many people have already mentioned, the estimate of the output gap is very hard to come by.
<START>In the Greenbook forecast we see that unemployment continues to run relatively high, and we’re assuming 5 percent as full employment from a NAIRU perspective.<END>
However, as Dave Stockton already mentioned, the standard deviation is 1 percentage point on this unemployment rate.
Many of us remember that in the late ’90s unemployment got well below 5 percent without any inflation pressures.
After talking to human resource executives at several corporations about the way they manage people today, I also am optimistic that wage pressures will continue to be more muted than they might have been in the past.
Businesses today have much more flexibility in the way December 9, 200382 of 133they manage human resources.
Management tends to compensate people more through the use of incentive pay so that employees earn more money either as productivity targets are met or as revenue comes in through sales commissions.
Businesses accept the practice of outsourcing and contract employment so that functions that are not core to the organization are now contracted out to other organizations that have much more productivity and effectiveness in handling those particular functions and can do the work at a much lower cost.
Companies continually look throughout the organization for such opportunities whether sales are up or down.
Improvements in technology now allow services and businesses to be supplied by accessing labor resources internationally so that we’re no longer confined to U.S.
workers even for services.
All these mitigating factors lead me, looking forward, not to be so concerned about the impact of compensation as a force to drive up inflation in the short run.
The exceptionally large jump in productivity that we saw in the third quarter is not likely to be sustained, especially as growing business confidence leads to new hiring.
However, because of the factors above, I think the pace of productivity growth may well continue to run above historically high levels.
Like Governor Ferguson, I believe that productivity growth may not slow as much as in the Greenbook baseline forecast.
Corporate profits in the third quarter were significantly higher than they have been recently.
In fact, the profits were back to levels recorded in quarters of the boom years.
Interestingly, the consensus forecast for corporate profits for all of 2003 is running at twice the level that was expected at the beginning of this year.
What about inflation?
Inflation does appear to be turning up, but it remains at very low levels.
The Greenbook continues to forecast that core inflation will be in the low 1 percent range for the next two years.
<START>Nevertheless, as Dave commented in response to President Pianalto’s question, the probability of inflation getting into that dangerous zone of under ½ percent is still December 9, 200383 of 133running at 1 in 4, which I consider to be a significant risk of unwelcome inflation with substantial costs to the economy.<END>
The markets and private economists have different forecasts from the one in the Greenbook.
The outside forecasts tend to have much lower growth and much higher inflation.
But it’s interesting to compare today’s Blue Chip forecast for 2004 with the Blue Chip consensus at the beginning of the year.
<START>The projection for real GDP growth has moved up 80 basis points, and the expectations for inflation have moved down 40 basis points<END>
—closer to what the Greenbook is showing for 2004.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you very much.
Brian Madigan, please.
MR.
MADIGAN.2 Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’ll be referring to the material that is being distributed now.
Financial markets were subject to two strong crosscurrents over the intermeeting period:
generally robust economic data and policymakers’ statements emphasizing that policy could remain accommodative for a long time.
As of the close of the Bluebook on Thursday evening, the economic data had predominated.
Although market participants saw no chance of policy tightening at this meeting, a majority thought that, in view of evidence that the economy has turned the corner, you would modify or drop the “considerable period” sentence today to begin laying the groundwork for an eventual move away from accommodation.
As shown in the top left-hand panel of exhibit 1, the expected path of the federal funds rate estimated from futures market quotes (the blue line) had steepened a little relative to that prevailing at the previous meeting (the red line).
The top right-hand panel shows that yields on Treasury coupon issues were up 10 to 25 basis points for the period.
However, Friday’s employment data proved disappointing to traders, and the picture in financial markets has changed noticeably as a result.
Treasury yields now are about unchanged to up several basis points for the period.
The expected path of the funds rate over the next eighteen months (the red line in the left-hand panel) has tilted down a touch.
Its trajectory remains notably flat for the next few months, testifying to the efficacy of your statements in anchoring near-term expectations.
Indeed, as indicated by the probability distribution in the bottom left-hand panel, markets see good odds that the target funds rate will still be at 1 percent around midyear.
Still, the five bars to the right of 1 percent indicate that markets place considerable weight on a tightening over the next six months.
 2 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).
December 9, 200384 of 133Much of the market debate on monetary policy over the past six weeks has focused on just when this firming process will begin and, especially, on how you will adjust the statement in advance of that tightening.
As shown in the bottom right-hand panel, about half the primary dealers now expect you to modify or drop the “considerable period” language at this meeting.
That fraction was noticeably larger before Friday, but the employment data prompted some to revise their predictions.
Only a few anticipate any change in your individual risk assessments at this meeting, and five of the twenty-two expect you to shift to an indication that, overall, the risks are balanced.
<START>The Bluebook similarly devoted much attention to alternative balance of risk assessments and “considerable period” statements.<END>
By the way, as noted in the top panel of your next exhibit, the Bluebook also discussed two policy alternatives:
an unchanged stance of policy and a 25 basis point easing.
Our decision to include some discussion of easing was motivated partly by the Committee’s existing risk assessments and “considerable period” language.
Support for that alternative came as well from the staff’s projection that an output gap would persist over the next year and that, as a consequence, inflation would tend to edge down further from an already low level.
From one perspective, a case could also have been made for consideration of a tightening.
Aggregate demand has heated up, the real funds rate appears to be below its longer-run equilibrium;
and in the Greenbook, the next policy move is the first in a sequence of tightenings.
<START>Nonetheless, we didn’t discuss the pros and cons of policy firming at this meeting because any near-term move in that direction would seem completely out of sync with both the existing balance of risks statement and the FOMC’s indication that policy can remain accommodative for a considerable period.<END>
Indeed, judging by your comments so far at this meeting, the issue on the table today would appear to be not what to do but what to say in the rationale paragraph of your announcement, in your risk assessments, and in the “considerable period” sentence.
The main changes to the rationale paragraph, outlined in the top right panel, presumably would be to update the analysis to reflect the recent data
<START>—for example, by characterizing the expansion as now “brisk,” or something along those lines, rather than as “firming,” and perhaps by describing the labor market as “improving modestly” rather than as “stabilizing.” The balance of risks assessment, however, is considerably more complicated.<END>
To help address this issue, the middle panel repeats table 1 from the Bluebook.
<START>The two columns present what would appear to be the plausible choices for the balance of risks on inflation<END>
—the risk of unwelcome further disinflation and balanced risks.
<START>The two rows refer to balanced risks to sustainable economic growth and upside growth risks.<END>
As Vincent noted at your last meeting, the Committee’s current communications structure gives it plenty of toggle switches, and those rows and columns, together with the numerous entries in the table, plus some less plausible choices that have been omitted, reflect that multitude of options.
<START>Beginning with the current configuration, indicated in the top left-hand cell, the Committee could choose to retain its assessment that the risks to sustainable growth are December 9, 200385 of 133balanced, that the risks to inflation are weighted toward an unwelcome fall, and that a decline in inflation is the predominant concern.<END>
This assessment would seem especially warranted if the Committee interprets the phrase “sustainable economic growth” as allowing for expansion for a time at a rate above potential
—an outcome that recent data seem to be suggesting
—so long as growth is expected to moderate to a pace that would eventually bring the level of output into line with that of potential.
In this case, the likely persistence of an output gap for several more quarters even in the context of above-trend growth
—and the possibility that productivity could continue to come in above expectations
<START>—would seem consistent with downside inflation risks.<END>
<START>With these individual risks, the Committee presumably would again indicate that the risks are weighted toward an unwelcome decline in inflation, although it could also assess the risks as about balanced if it saw the downside inflation risks, while still present, as having diminished substantially.<END>
You might instead view the risks to inflation as now balanced.
<START>Although you might project that an output gap could well persist for some time, tending to tilt inflation down, you might also now see some upside risks.<END>
<START>These upside risks could stem from a variety of sources, including the possibility of speed effects caused by strong economic growth, inflation expectations that may have edged up<END>
—at least as inferred from financial markets
—dollar depreciation, or even economic growth that could turn out to be rapid enough to push the level of output above its potential in the foreseeable future.
As shown in the upper right-hand cell, the combination of judgments that inflation risks as well as growth risks are now balanced presumably would be accompanied by an assessment that the overall risks have been equalized.
<START>The bottom two cells pertain to cases in which the Committee judges that the risks to the attainment of sustainable growth have shifted to the upside.<END>
This assessment might be appropriate if the Committee sees a strong chance that the economic advance will remain rapid for a while and would be especially consistent with an interpretation of “sustainable economic growth” as strictly denoting growth at the same rate as that of potential output.
Even with this appraisal of output risks, the Committee could still see the risks to inflation as weighted to the downside in view of the likely effects of the output gap, as noted in the bottom left cell.
With these two component judgments, the Committee would likely conclude either that the overall risks are balanced or that undesirably low inflation remains the predominant concern.
The choice between those two conclusions would depend on the Committee’s assessment of the relative probabilities as well as the relative costs of the various possible outcomes.
In particular, the Committee might feel that the risks are still predominantly to the downside if it saw the potential economic costs associated with significant further disinflation as especially acute.
<START>But if the Committee saw the downside inflation risks as now smaller, it might view the overall risks as balanced.<END>
As noted in the Bluebook, a third net assessment
<START>—that unsustainably rapid growth is now the main concern<END>
—would also be a logical possibility in this cell.
<START>But it seems unlikely that the Committee would make such a sharp change in its assessment of the overall risks while making no change to the risks to inflation.<END>
<START>The final set of choices, shown in the bottom right-hand cell, arise if the Committee concludes that the risks to growth had moved to the upside and that the inflation risks were now December 9, 200386 of 133balanced.<END>
<START>would Particularly if the Committee had arrived at this judgment partly because it interpreted “sustainable economic growth” as the growth rate of potential, then it might gauge the overall risks as balanced.<END>
That’s because the expansion of output at a pace above potential would presumably not involve any significant economic costs as long as the level of output remained at or below that of potential.
<START>However, if the Committee had concluded that the risks to growth were to the upside even using a more liberal definition of sustainable expansion, then it might also see the overall risks as skewed to the upside.<END>
As noted just below the table, the Committee could also choose to qualify any of its judgments about the risks
—for example, by indicating that the risks to inflation are now only marginally to the downside.
Particularly if the Committee saw one of the component risks as just slightly out of kilter, there are cases in which gauging the overall risks would seem to involve excessive hair-splitting.
<START>If so, you might see advantages in refraining from characterizing the overall balance of risks, letting the individual assessments in the context of the overall announcement convey your sense of the risks.<END>
In that regard, your treatment of the “considerable period” sentence will be key in terms of the market reaction.
Some options for this decision are outlined in the final panel.
Obviously, retention of the sentence is one option.
It would seem to be warranted if you saw a reasonably high likelihood that the stance of policy could be left unchanged for some time.
Repeating it might seem particularly appropriate if you were fairly confident that markets have built in a steeper trajectory for the funds rate than will prove necessary.
However, you might be inclined to modify or delete the sentence for any of several reasons.
You might be uncomfortable as a matter of principle with a policy precommitment, particularly one that seems tied simply to the passage of time rather than to economic developments.
Alternatively, you might feel, at a more practical level, that the statement has served its purpose but is no longer necessary.
Or in view of the recent economic data and the relatively low real federal funds rate, you might think that the time at which policy might need to start moving toward neutral is drawing closer.
A range of possible modifications to the sentence in question also could be considered by the Committee, with the intention that the sentence could be further adjusted in the future and eventually dropped.
One approach would be simply to vary the words slightly, say, by substituting “for a while” instead of “for a considerable period.” Even such a slight change would be read in the markets as significant.
Another option is to explain why policy accommodation can be maintained by incorporating a preface to the sentence:
<START>“With inflation quite low and resource use slack,” etc. A similar approach would be to declare that, in view of the substantial slack and low inflation, the Committee can be patient in adjusting the stance of policy.<END>
These formulations would hint not only that policy tightening need not start soon but also that it could be implemented at a measured pace when it does begin.
<START>Still another approach would be to condition the maintenance of policy accommodation not on the passage of time but on economic developments, such as a substantial reduction in disinflationary risks.<END>
A final option would be just to drop the sentence.
December 9, 200387 of 133 As I mentioned above, the Committee now has several dimensions along which it can adjust the communication of its monetary policy intentions.
Because of this complexity, predicting the market response to any particular configuration has become even more difficult.
Nonetheless, the “considerable period” sentence probably is key.
Given current market expectations, interest rates likely would tend to fall somewhat in response to combinations that leave that sentence more or less in place, although that effect could be offset at least partly by other changes to the announcement.
But dropping or significantly modifying the “considerable period” sentence at this time could prompt a noticeable sell-off in fixed-income and equity markets.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Questions for Brian?
MR.
GRAMLICH.
I think I’m speaking for most of us when I say that I hope this table doesn’t get more complicated than it is.
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
You haven’t seen the three dimensional one yet!
MR.
GRAMLICH.
No, I haven’t, and I don’t want to!
MR.
MADIGAN.
Those who participate in drafting the Bluebook would share that view.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further comments or questions?
If not, let me get started.
It’s fairly evident that the economy is at a turning point by virtually all the measures that we have.
Historically, it has almost invariably been the case that the Federal Reserve would tighten under such conditions.
Indeed, preemption is something that has filtered its way into the monetary policy lexicon.
The issue of preemption implies, of course, that we will adjust our policy ahead of anything that we can readily foresee.
In current circumstances, therefore, there is and there will continue to be a lot of pressure on us to move rates higher.
We have resisted because of a quite considerable and significant difference in the present economy from what we have observed in the past.
In recent decades, the turning point toward accelerating economic activity usually occurred when the inflation rate was 3 percent or 4 percent, sometimes even higher, and the December 9, 200388 of 133necessity for preemption was critically obvious.
<START>The problem with preemption, though it is something that is very interesting to observe in retrospect, is that it doesn’t necessarily follow that we are preempting future developments that will actually occur the way we expect.<END>
So, we have to be careful not to try to preempt something that is not fairly likely to happen.
There is a risk and indeed a cost to being wrong.
The risk was one that we were willing to take in earlier years because the economic outlook was such that we could not really afford not to be preemptive, even if we recognized that we might misread a turning point and act prematurely, with clearly negative effects.
The markets obviously are presuming that the earlier sort of paradigm is currently what is in place.
It is not.
It is not because we are at a very low inflation rate, 1 percent or thereabouts, and the output gap, however one measures it, is quite sizable.
As a consequence, what we have been trying to communicate to the markets is that we don’t wish to take the risks of preemption when we don’t have to.
That is what induced us awhile back to put a reference to a “considerable period” in our statements to underscore the fact that we are in a different type of period.
It’s very evident that our effort to communicate that message succeeded.
We succeeded in the sense that the basic tilt of the yield curve is reasonably consistent with the presumption that we will not adjust policy right away or that we need to move right away.
<START>Leaving aside the issue associated with the five-to-ten-year inflation compensation measure that we were discussing earlier, there’s very little evidence that the markets are pricing in a buildup in long-term inflation expectations.<END>
Consequently, I think we may reasonably conclude that the markets believe us.
In Al Broaddus’s term, we clearly have “credibility” in this regard, and it’s very important that we not squander it.
<START>The reason I say that is that we took a risk with the insertion of our reference to a December 9, 200389 of 133“considerable period,” not a risk so far as economic policy or monetary policy were concerned but a risk that what we said could significantly erode the credibility of this institution, with negative effects.<END>
That did not happen.
We chose to take that risk rather than to take preemptive actions that could have been a mistake.
<START>As a consequence, we are now in a position where we have to figure out how we should gradually move away from our statement regarding a “considerable period.” It’s fairly apparent that for a central bank to forecast how long it is not apt to move is a mistake, of which we are all aware.<END>
In my judgment, what we have to do at this stage really rests on how best to disengage ourselves from this problem with minimal negative effects and, I hope, major positive effects.
In this regard I’m inclined to the view, but I’m not certain, that if we use “considerable period” this time we can change almost anything else in the statement without fostering any adverse impact.
Indeed, that’s what I would suggest that we do.
I do not deny that the most likely outcome is that inflation will continue to recede.
The problem in acting on that belief, however, is that if we are wrong the consequences will be quite negative, to say the least.
The chances of being wrong are there.
I don’t think they represent the majority probability, but as we were discussing earlier there are large variances among some of the equations that link the output gap and inflation.
We also discussed the fact that this phenomenon is very difficult to filter out in other economies.
Moreover, we have the problem of taking a regression analysis largely based on periods with an inflation range of perhaps 2 to 10 percent and extrapolating that regression linearly to below 2 percent and presuming that we are getting the same interactions.
<START>So, not having past observations of how this augmented Phillips curve functions at this low inflation level, we’re just making an extrapolation, and it could be wrong.<END>
<START>If it is wrong in the context of an economy that December 9, 200390 of 133is accelerating rapidly and a marketplace that is getting fairly jittery, the costs to the stability of the markets are in my view potentially too high.<END>
Therefore, my general view and approach here is to presume that the inflation risks are close to balanced.
What that does for us, if we also have balance with respect to growth and retain the words “for a considerable period,” is to give us the flexibility to do several things.
For one, if our statement regarding balanced inflation risks turns out to be incorrect and the rate of inflation continues to fall, it doesn’t cost us very much.
We can very readily move rates lower if necessary in the context of a statement referring to a “considerable period.” Moreover, my proposal would also put us in a position where we may be able in January to change the reference from “considerable period” to some concept of “patience” or the “ability to have patience.” In turn, that would provide us with the flexibility to move, possibly as early as March if we have to but certainly by May.
In any event, so long as we have a reference to either “considerable period” or “patience” in our statement, we will have the capability of moving the funds rate lower.
In my judgment, putting out a statement that essentially captures that capability gives us, as far as I can see, the maximum flexibility that we can achieve at this point.
It also gives us an exit strategy that puts us in a position where we can be adjusting our policy.
One needs to remember that the current federal funds rate is well below any estimate of the equilibrium rate.
<START>That is, when we start to raise the rate, we may have the problem of having to return to the equilibrium rate relatively quickly.<END>
As many of you have mentioned, a quick adjustment in the rate structure at this stage could destabilize a number of the elements in our forecast.
We will want to move as moderately as we can in the process of returning to a neutral position at a point when the output gap is declining but still there.
Obviously, we can’t wait until the gap closes to begin to move because December 9, 200391 of 133financial markets may be adjusting well in advance of that.
Expectations of growing pressures will be there.
We also have to bear in mind that our estimate of the output gap is not all that clear-cut.
Fifty years ago we had no difficulty knowing what capacity was in a lot of industries.
<START>Open-hearth furnaces produced a certain amount of steel, and the chemistry prevented them from doing very much else until steel manufacturers started putting in oxygen lances and eventually going to oxygen furnaces.<END>
Assembly lines for motor vehicles involved very rigid systems a half century ago.
Now, manufacturers use batch processes, and consequently the notion of what is capacity is an increasingly flexible concept.
But in order to generate an output gap we need a point estimate of capacity, and that’s what we use.
As a result, there’s a question as to whether the gap means the same thing today that it meant twenty years ago.
I think not.
I believe the potential variance of that measurement has increased considerably, and I think we have to take that into account.
<START>My bottom line in all of this is that I would recommend that we not move the funds rate and that we communicate in our announcement something similar to the type of risk balances I’ve just mentioned for growth and inflation.<END>
Let me read a way of doing this.
It’s only five lines:
<START>“The Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks to the attainment of sustainable growth for the next few quarters are roughly equal.<END>
<START>The probability of an unwelcome fall in inflation has diminished in recent months and now appears almost equal to that of a rise in inflation.<END>
<START>However, with inflation quite low and resource use slack, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be maintained for a considerable period.” You will observe that the previous statement of balance for growth and inflation combined is not in here and that the “considerable period” reference is employed in lieu of that and I think for appropriate reasons.<END>
So that’s my recommendation.
Who would like to comment?
December 9, 200392 of 133MR. GRAMLICH.
Well, I support the recommendation.
As I said, I have a hard time getting the right flavor, given the logic of the table that Brian has in exhibit 2.
<START>My logic is that we are in the northwest and we want to get to the northeast, or from low inflation as the predominant concern to a balanced inflation risk assessment.<END>
I think the statement you propose migrates us over.
<START>I’m not so sure it’s a bad idea<END>
—it might be a good idea
—to get rid of that overall balance of risks statement when it becomes very awkward, and this meeting may be one of those times.
So I think your recommendation has all of these elements, and I support it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
At the end of the earlier discussion I was going to say that the policy decision continues to be a “no-brainer” but that what we say about policy has become a headache.
I’m not sure about the no-brainer part anymore, but I am sure about the headache!
I agree with you that we don’t want to move policy now.
I think the uptick in the economy is just beginning to be sustainable on its own without an excessive amount of policy stimulus, and I’d like to see that play out.
Whatever we do in the future, I agree with President Guynn that, when we do decide to move, the risks inherent in raising rates in large steps early on are quite sizable.
So I think we ought to be willing to begin earlier in order to move the funds rate up slowly when we do begin to tighten.
<START>When one thinks of the number of what might be called “moving parts” we now are dealing with in our statement, as discussed in Brian’s presentation and in the Bluebook, the complexity is really quite stunning.<END>
We’re not looking at a 2 by 2 matrix.
There are some extra dimensions of this that are beyond my capability to describe correctly in mathematical terms.
As far as I can tell, something like six or seven moving parts are involved.
<START>They include what we did, why we did it, where the risks are on growth, what we mean by sustainable growth, what the December 9, 200393 of 133risks are on inflation, the balance of the risks, and now the “considerable period” language.<END>
There can be a number of variations on those six or seven moving parts, and that profusion is multiplying and increasing the headache associated with how to talk about our policy decision.
I agree with the thrust of your recommendation, Mr. Chairman, which is to reduce the number of moving parts.
I’m not sure I would have started with the references to the balance of risks.
My preference as a place to start would be with the “considerable period” sentence
—by modifying it or even taking it out.
As a central banker I am growing more and more concerned that we’re in a very difficult place with that language.
<START>President Geithner’s remarks on the credibility within financial markets at a time of a declining value of the dollar and other developments suggest to me that we should start to look a bit more conservative than we have been<END>
—even recognizing that the evidence points to a wide output gap.
That said, I am happy you are willing to start modifying this language and reduce the number of moving parts.
I think the steps toward modifying it could be taken faster than you’ve outlined, but I am willing to go along with your proposal at this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Mr. Chairman, I think your proposal is an excellent one.
I very much like the fact that you’ve narrowed the balance of risks on unwelcome disinflation versus inflation.
I think that’s desirable.
I like dropping the overall balance of risks statement, and I particularly like conditioning the “considerable period” of time phrase at the end of the statement.
<START>I think putting in the additional words, “with inflation quite low and resource use slack,” is an excellent way to condition it.<END>
I assume, although you didn’t mention it, that you will also be suggesting some changes in the rationale paragraph in terms of what we say about the labor market.
December 9, 200394 of 133CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Yes.
Let me just quickly read that paragraph.
It’s very short.
“The Committee continues to believe that an accommodative stance of monetary policy, coupled with robust underlying growth in productivity, is providing important ongoing support to economic activity.
The evidence accumulated over the intermeeting period confirms that output is expanding briskly, and the labor market appears to be improving modestly.
Increases in core consumer prices are muted and expected to remain low.” MR. MOSKOW.
I think that’s very good.
I spent a lot of time trying to figure out how we were going to get out of this dilemma we have with the language and what the wording should be.
I think you’ve captured our assessment of the situation very, very well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The way I tend to approach this is that I want to be very clear in my own mind about what I believe before I try to talk about how to communicate it.
So let me start with what I believe.
I think that the inflation risks are balanced and that the output risks are balanced.
I believe there is a lot of room for the economy to grow.
I don’t think we’re likely to press upon any speed limit issues, and in my view even very robust growth is not likely to cause imbalances that are going to get us into trouble.
So in that sense I think we could have output growth significantly above
—I hope not below
—the Greenbook forecast without causing problems.
<START>I realize that a lot of people are concerned about the zero bound issue, although as I think most of you know my personal inflation target is perhaps at the bottom of the range deemed desirable by Committee as a whole.<END>
At any rate, for those concerned about the zero bound, I think that issue is going to arise primarily in an economy that is weakening
—one that needs the support provided by pushing real interest rates down below zero.
That doesn’t seem to be the December 9, 200395 of 133prospect.
<START>Therefore, if in the next year the inflation rate stays below what one would like as a long-run target, it seems to me that it’s very unlikely to cause any problem in an economy that is growing robustly.<END>
In my view, there is some risk that inflation could run above the rate in the Greenbook forecast, and that could cause us a lot of pain.
I think that could be a difficult situation to deal with.
I agree that this is not the right time to start raising rates.
When I walked in here my view was to try to change the statement along the following lines.
In the paragraph reviewing our assessment of the current situation, I would say that the inflation risks are balanced and that the output risks are balanced.
In that case we wouldn’t need to indicate which is the predominant concern;
we could just eliminate that sentence altogether.
I’d also delete the “considerable period” sentence altogether
—making the statement a very lean and spare one
—understanding that removing that sentence probably would produce a negative reaction in the markets this afternoon.
But people would get over that.
<START>Then we’d have a chance to explain at greater length what is really involved here<END>
<START>—that this is not a typical recovery period because we are starting with such a low rate of inflation and there is no immediate need, given what we now know, for a policy response.<END>
That would get rid of the problem all at once, and we would not have to deal with it again.
We’re going to have to deal with it again as long as we leave that phrase “considerable period” in the statement.
So I think this might be a good time just to be done with it, which is the position I had when I walked in.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bernanke.
MR.
BERNANKE.
I think it would be a mistake to drop that language entirely.
In my view making it conditional is the right way to proceed, and I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
December 9, 200396 of 133MS. BIES.
<START>Mr. Chairman, while I’m still uncomfortable with a policy commitment in the proposed wording, I feel much better with the introductory phrase “with inflation quite low and resource use slack,” which makes it a conditional statement.<END>
I also like dropping the language that wraps up our assessment of the balance of risks.
I think doing that helps.
So I’ll support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is a Committee of nineteen people, and I think we’re in the area of a judgment call as much as anything else.
If I were doing this individually, I would have retained the summation sentence and not changed it very dramatically, but I would have made the other changes you recommended.
I don’t feel so strongly about it, however, that I couldn’t support what you’ve proposed.
So I am supportive of your recommendation.
And I don’t want to lose sight of the fact that your initial recommendation is that we keep the funds rate at 1 percent, which I also support.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support your recommendation.
I think we’re moving in the right direction, recognizing that the balance of risks is in the process of changing or in fact has shifted.
Over the last couple of months, the statement hasn’t changed very much, but the economy has, and I think we’re in the process of catching up.
And we’re preparing the markets for a modification of the “considerable period” language.
I think they’ll see that.
I’m not concerned that there might be some adverse market reaction to this perception.
I think the economy is sufficiently strong and robust to be able to handle a modest to moderate backup in rates.
We will be considering the language more fully at our next meeting.
<START>So rather than try to fiddle even more with the wording, I think just dropping that overall balance of risks sentence is December 9, 200397 of 133probably better since we will all have a chance to look at the language with a more or less clean piece of paper next time.<END>
I agree with you that the balance of costs and risks we’re facing now is different from anything the Fed has faced since probably the 1950s in terms of a low inflation environment.
I don’t think that rules out preemption as you seemed to be implying.
I think it does mean that we take the risk on a different side.
We will have to be preemptive;
<START>we’ll need to move policy well before we see inflation picking up.<END>
It’s just that we won’t need to move quite as fast.
I see it as a lesser degree of preemption rather than no preemption.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I don’t disagree with the way you phrased it.
MR.
KOHN.
Okay.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, obviously I agree with your policy recommendation for the funds rate.
I don’t agree with the change in the statement.
<START>I think we have an opportunity here to identify the risks as balanced and drop the “considerable period” statement.<END>
If we were to remove that statement, I think the market might, as President Poole suggested, exhibit some gyrations this afternoon, but I believe there’s a fair amount of expectation in the market that we will drop that wording today.
If we did, I think it would allow us more flexibility going forward.
It would enable us at our January meeting to focus on more forward-looking issues relating to the policy statement.
I must admit that that would be my strong preference.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Mr. Chairman, after the first go-around I made a note to myself during the break that if I were a committee of one I would drop completely the reference to further disinflation.
I think we learned earlier that repeating phrases gets us into trouble.
I noted also December 9, 200398 of 133that I would like to characterize the inflation risk as either balanced or close to balance.
I think we’re missing a chance to move a little further away from the “considerable period” language.
I actually like the “can be patient in adjusting the stance of policy” phrase that was suggested as an alternative.
However, I can and will support your recommendation.
I’m not sure, given the hour, that I can convince myself
—or anyone else
—that my approach is a better way to go.
So I am comfortable with your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
When I entered the room, the questions in my mind were how to deal with these risk-balance statements and how to deal with the “considerable period” sentence.
I wondered whether or not the group would be willing to take steps to address both of those issues in one meeting.
I think the balance of risks is correctly done in your recommended approach.
I share Governor Gramlich’s view regarding the summation of the balance of risks;
I was never quite comfortable with it.
So I view dropping that statement actually as an extra positive.
Taking this in a two-step process
—recognizing that we don’t have to move really and that we don’t expect to have to move very quickly
—suggests that the “considerable period” sentence is probably still a factual statement.
In that case, it seems to me that this is the appropriate way of getting the markets and the economy ready for the next step.
So I can support your recommendation.
I think it’s the right way to go.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As you know, I’ve indicated a preference for balance in terms of the inflation risk.
It seems to me, however, that the suggestion you have made moves us a long way in that direction and, therefore, I’m very comfortable with your recommendation.
December 9, 200399 of 133CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
Brian indicated in his remarks that one rationale for dropping the “considerable period” language is that one is opposed to a policy precommitment.
I’ve been opposed to the policy precommitment all along, but I don’t think dropping that sentence at this time conveys that message.
I would prefer to do more work to improve our communications rather than have the markets try to figure out what we’re attempting to communicate by making a change in that “considerable period” language.
I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
First Vice President Lyon.
MR.
LYON.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
The proposed language captures our view of the impact of recent developments and, as you have outlined, preserves policy flexibility.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
I support both the policy decision and the statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, I support your policy recommendation.
<START>I especially liked what you said about preemption and particularly the issues we could face now in that regard versus what we faced when the inflation rate was 3 percent or higher in past periods.<END>
I could accept Don’s edit regarding preemption, but I like the general thrust of what you said.
I think it’s especially relevant.
I can accept your recommendation with regard to the language.
My own preference would have been to leave all of the statement unchanged under the circumstances.
<START>I understand the intuition, but I personally don’t see a compelling reason on the logic, given what I understand December 9, 2003100 of 133to be the facts, for making a change today.<END>
But I can accept it.
I’m very glad that we’re going to leave in the “considerable period” reference.
I think that’s where the public focus is going to be.
For me the key point, as I mentioned earlier, is that we had an extraordinary decline in unit labor costs in the third quarter.
We may be looking at further declines, and that is a key determinant of inflation going forward.
Again, the actual and prospective inflation rate is at the bottom of what I think most of us see as the desirable range for the longer run.
Given that situation, I would not want to send a signal to the market that I think a significant modification of the language would have sent.
That’s my feeling, so I support your position.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
MR.
GEITHNER.
I’m comfortable with both the policy recommendation and the statement as crafted.
I think the statement you’ve proposed is better than the alternatives.
In my view we’re at a point where it’s appropriate to dial back a bit the forward-looking signal we’re sending.
You’re proposing to do it in four different ways, and I think each of those is justified and helpful.
People say that there’s something of a paradox about policy and interest rates in that, by the time we feel the need to talk about an exit strategy, it may be too late.
<START>I don’t think one can make the case that we’re at that point yet, and I believe your recommended approach gives us a little more flexibility as we confront the more difficult choices we’re going to face in the first two quarters of next year.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
I support your recommendation.
<START>I would have preferred to eliminate the “considerable period” phrase, get it over with, and start the New Year out with a clean slate;<END>
but I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Would you read the appropriate text, please?
December 9, 2003101 of 133MR. BERNARD.
<START>I’ll be reading the directive wording on page 15 of the Bluebook and, with regard to risk assessments, the first two sentences that the Chairman read to you from the draft press release.<END>
That’s what is being voted on.
With regard to the directive itself:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 1 percent.” With regard to the sentences going into the press statement:
<START>“The Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks to the attainment of sustainable growth for the next few quarters are roughly equal.<END>
<START>The probability of an unwelcome fall in inflation has diminished in recent months and now appears almost equal to that of a rise in inflation.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Call the roll.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman Geithner Yes Governor Bernanke Yes Governor Bies Yes President Broaddus Yes Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Guynn Yes Governor Kohn Yes President Moskow Yes Governor Olson Yes President Parry Yes CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I suggest that we take a brief recess to get lunch and come back to the table here.
Governor Ferguson will then give us a progress report on the activities of his working group.
December 9, 2003102 of 133[Recess] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson has the floor.
MR.
FERGUSON.3 Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me start by saying that this is merely a progress report from your working group on communications.
How long we discuss this today is up to the Committee.
I have some comments that will take about five minutes or so, and we can stop there.
But there will be time for substantive comments later.
<START>The working group, as you know, asked for contributions from members of the Committee on how to handle the balance of risks statement or the risk assessment.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Why don’t you indicate the members of the working group.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Okay.
My colleagues on the working group are Governor Gramlich, Governor Kohn, Governor Bernanke, President Stern (who’s not here today), President Moskow, and President Parry.
Our group was asked to consider what Cathy Minehan has described as the headache part of the statement, which is the risk assessment.
We recognize that the original language worked for two to three years but that circumstances have caused it to outrun its usefulness.
We received from various members of the Committee eight or nine different recommendations.
Some of the proposals focused narrowly on the risk-assessment paragraph itself.
Some were more broadly focused on the overall process in terms of how we put together the statements and how that might interact with other possible changes to our communication policy, such as an earlier release of the minutes.
As you know from a memo that I sent you earlier, the members of the working group think that the overall Committee will benefit most from our efforts if we remain focused primarily on the risk-assessment paragraph.
We may look at the slightly broader issue of how 3 The materials used by Mr. Ferguson are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).
 December 9, 2003103 of 133the risk assessment would interact with the first substantive paragraph in the statement but not go much beyond that into thinking about the minutes and when they are released, and so forth.
We believe that any decision on the minutes should be viewed as a separate issue and should be debated by the Committee as a whole.
We don’t necessarily, as a group of seven, add a particular value to the process of helping to think through the issues involved in that.
<START>So in the context of focusing on the risk assessment, it turns out that the recommendations that came in basically had three different approaches, or flavors if you will, that differed in three basic respects.<END>
One difference involved the specificity with which the risk assessment was given
—in particular the question of whether it had some sense of a benchmark associated with it.
The second thing that seemed to divide the various options that were presented was how they dealt with the discussion of levels and changes in output gaps or inflation gaps.
Some mixed them, and some tried to divide them very neatly.
The third difference was the specificity regarding the length of the time period.
<START>Some of the proposals favored a fairly vague time frame, and some retained the language of “foreseeable future.” Other approaches recommended to us supported specific time frame references measured in terms of quarters, months, or even years.<END>
So we looked at those three elements and basically came up with three archetypes, if you will, of how to put together these various components;
and that’s what we’re going to focus on for the remainder of the life of this working group.
What you have before you after the first page, which gives an overview, shows three types of proposals.
I’m not going to ask you to comment on them or vote on them.
I have provided them just so you can see what they look like, recognizing that the Committee itself will have plenty of time to work on the language.
December 9, 2003104 of 133The first proposal
—just in terms of the elements that I talked about but not looking at the detail of the language
—basically merges levels and changes.
We had several suggestions that fell into that category;
they merged levels and changes and alluded to benchmarks.
There were a number of people who wanted to do that in the overall risk-assessment sentence.
As you can see, in referring to long-run goals of price stability or long-run goals of sustained economic growth, the time horizon used in this approach is a very elastic notion of the foreseeable future.
So this proposal represents that cluster of approaches to deal with the risk assessment.
Notice also that this is only a risk-assessment paragraph, so that’s what we’re going to stress under this option.
Proposal B is somewhat more explicit about levels but addresses them in the first paragraph.
<START>This is an example with references to such things as inflation remaining well contained or slack remaining considerable.<END>
So it includes a discussion of levels, but that’s separate from the discussion of changes.
This one puts our judgment regarding changes in the second paragraph, reflecting a certain style that seemed to come through in several of the recommendations we received.
<START>It alludes again to benchmarks in the overall risk assessment but in a somewhat less structured or less quantifiable way, with terms such as “long-run sustainable pace,” et cetera.<END>
But it uses a much more specific time frame
—the next few quarters
—than the elastic concept of foreseeable future.
So this proposal reflected another cluster of thoughts that we received.
<START>Again, you can see that this one works primarily with the risk assessment but does leave a clear expectation that the first paragraph would tend to have some language that deals with levels.<END>
So that’s how we handled the levels versus changes dilemma.
The third proposal is much more focused on the whole statement.
It again is explicit about levels, primarily in the first substantive paragraph, leaving the changes basically to the second paragraph on the risk assessment.
This one alludes to benchmarks in the first paragraph.
December 9, 2003105 of 133It doesn’t talk about inflation necessarily being contained just in and of itself but puts that in a broader context.
This proposal moves us, frankly, very much in a direction that we’ve never traveled.
It is in some sense the most radical of the options we are considering because it does talk about a forecast.
<START>It refers in the second paragraph to the Committee’s assessment of the risks to the outlook in terms of its forecast of economic growth over the coming period.<END>
It is explicit about the forecast period
—the next two years in this case
—and references some potential developments that might change the forecast.
Some of you really wanted to see us move in this direction.
This would be very new territory for the Committee.
Importantly, if we go in the direction of proposal C, I think that really does imply a broader set of changes in our Committee dynamics.
I say that because to get us talking about forecasts at every meeting will take more time and will be quite different from the risk-assessment discussion.
So if the Committee were to adopt this approach, we ought to recognize the likely effect on the Committee dynamics
—that it will require more time to look at the statement and more time to think through what our outlook might be.
This in some sense is a logical progression from where we’ve been since the risk assessment was originally intended to have a forward-looking tone.
But this puts much more weight on the forward-looking aspect and involves a forecast type of statement from the Committee.
Going in this direction, I will repeat, reflects the desire of enough Committee members that our working group thought it was at least worth considering.
Those are the broad types of statements we are looking at.
I would discourage you from getting terribly focused on any specific set of words but would ask that you really think about whether or not the mixture that we’ve put together is one on which you might like as a basis for our further discussions.
December 9, 2003106 of 133The second point I’d like to make in my part of the time allotted to this issue today is that we intend to stress-test these various options.
A combination of Reserve Bank and Board staff will look at the six scenarios we’ve identified, including some of the recent episodes that have proven most challenging.
Our goal here, as is always the case, is to try to see how these various types of risk assessments stack up against whatever developments are likely to occur or whatever curves we think the economy might throw us.
Again, we’re not going to be any more prescient than anybody else, but one hopes that with the six scenarios we’ll cover most of the things that are likely to happen
—or certainly all the scenarios that we think are most likely to be problematic.
So when we come back in January we’ll have the results of those stress tests, and we’ll see which ones seem to work and which ones seem to fail in certain circumstances.
Recognizing that we have had some phone calls and letters asking us to think about our communication policy more broadly, the Board’s staff will prepare some memos dealing with other suggestions such as expediting the release of the minutes.
The staff also will look in general at going even beyond the types of statements I’ve outlined today and enhancing the role of forecasts, since some people have suggested that as an approach.
<START>Again, that is not something on which the working group is going to give you a proposal or recommendation, but it will be provided as input for the discussion we’re going to have in January.<END>
Finally, this material is going to be sent to everyone in advance of the two-day meeting in January so we think there’ll be plenty of opportunity for level setting, if you will.
That will give us the chance to talk about the risk assessment and the statement more broadly and even expand the discussion to the questions of the interaction of the minutes and of forecasting becoming a fairly normal part of the Committee dynamics.
December 9, 2003107 of 133So that’s what we propose.
As I said, at this stage the working group is not seeking specific comments on the language
—though obviously you can do that if you want
—but rather just an affirmation about the process I’ve outlined.
We seek your views on whether the varieties or flavors of the statement that I’ve shown would be sufficient, as we think they would be, to give you the kind of thoughtful input that will allow us to have a focused and intelligent conversation at the two-day meeting in January.
That’s my six or seven minutes of time, and now it’s up to you how much further we go today.
Cathy Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Thank you, Roger.
I’m a little worried here.
I would just go back to what I said earlier.
We have gotten ourselves into a situation where
—in the terminology I used before
—we have a lot of moving parts in this statement.
None of these proposals that you have presented
—without going into details on any of them
—diminishes those moving parts at all.
It’s possible, based on a brief glance, that these proposals actually may add moving parts.
I don’t think that’s the direction we want to go.
I think we should be aiming to minimize rather than maximize the number of things we talk about in the statement we release after every meeting.
I believe we get into increasing amounts of trouble as we try to expand on what we cover yet keep the wording short and pithy enough
—that is, without the logic and back-and-forth discussion that went on in the Committee meeting
—to be in the press statement for each meeting In my view, and you and I had this conversation on the telephone, the endeavors of the working group should not preclude a discussion in January of having the statement be shorter and sweeter
—perhaps confining it to what we did and why we it.
did—perhaps the minutes released on an earlier schedule
We could let some other vehicle
—convey all the ins and outs and ups and downs of the Committee’s discussion.
You indicated that the January discussion would not preclude that possibility.
My concern is that an intensive amount of stress-testing of three December 9, 2003108 of 133alternatives with the same amount of moving parts
—albeit phrased somewhat differently or focused somewhat differently
—will result in our receiving huge papers on this topic five days, say, before the two-day meeting.
We have enormous amounts of material to assimilate anyway, and this will give us no time to discuss any other proposal or perspective that might not be as well fleshed out as these.
I’m worried that we’re going to continue along a line here that I don’t think has been very fruitful for us.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Okay.
The Chairman wants to speak, and then I want to respond to your comments.
Also, I have a list of people from the last meeting who wanted to speak on this issue but we ran out of time MS. MINEHAN.
Oh, I’m sorry.
Did I speak out of turn?
MR.
FERGUSON.
No, you did not speak out of turn.
I recognized you, so by definition you didn’t speak out of turn!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I want to support what Cathy is saying, and I do so from the point of view of somebody who has to figure out how to get a consensus out of this group.
It’s far easier to get the requisite number of members to support a policy than to support what we say about it.
For example, with twelve Committee members and, say, ten who favor the policy decision, there could be fifteen different reasons that might cause members to vote for it.
Therefore, it is far easier to get a group to support the actual policy than to get a consensus on why it is the appropriate policy.
The multiplication of the problems that emerge
—just using Cathy’s moving parts terminology
—to get people to agree on why they voted a certain way is a wholly different ball game.
I suggest to you that this is a remarkably uniform group in the sense that I think without exception we all hold a reasonably consistent view as to how the economy December 9, 2003109 of 133functions and, therefore, which levers are required to do what.
The only difference really boils down to questions of how we view the outlook.
<START>Nonetheless, this is a very complex process, and I just want to agree with Cathy that reducing the number of moving parts is going to be very important.<END>
We also have to avoid like the plague, if Michelle Smith has a 2:15 p.m.
deadline for releasing our statement to the press, anything that will extend these meetings well beyond when we ordinarily adjourn.
Just take today as an example
—today’s agenda was not particularly extensive, but it’s already twenty minutes before 2:00 p.m.
<START>If we start trying to discuss all the ifs, ands, and buts in the statement, we will not finish in time.<END>
But there is an alternative.
We can go to a 4:00 p.m.
announcement but let the press know well in advance that we are changing the time we plan to release our statement.
We can go later than that if you want.
But there are lots of other implications about this whole communications business.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Let me say a couple of things.
<START>One is that the Committee can collectively decide that this is more trouble than it’s worth and that we are communicating more than we need to communicate.<END>
We can conclude that none of these options feels right for a variety of reasons.
<START>We can merely say that this is all very interesting but, having looked at the stress test results and everything else, we as a Committee think that we no longer want to try to provide anything in our public statement that is forward-looking.<END>
We may reach that conclusion for process reasons or for substance reasons.
We may decide that we like having meetings that last only from 9 a.m.
to 1 p.m.
So nothing in this precludes, Mr. Chairman, the Committee’s ultimately deciding that this whole risk-assessment approach or forward-looking approach that we’ve worked on is not worth a candle.
MS.
MINEHAN.
But we’re likely to do so after having pored over a fifty-page paper!
December 9, 2003110 of 133MR. FERGUSON.
<START>We’re leaving it to the Committee to decide whether or not we should have a risk-assessment or a forward-looking element in our statement.<END>
I don’t think we felt that it was appropriate for our little subgroup to do anything more than to say that it is clearly an option not to have that in the statement.
We’re not taking that option away from you.
We can follow a process in which we first side with those
—if it is the majority view
—who want us to try to work on this approach.
We can certainly do that.
But nothing in taking that step precludes the Committee from ultimately deciding that it doesn’t want to go down this path.
I do agree, however, that some of these options would imply a meeting that starts earlier or goes later than is currently the case, and I’m not sure that the Committee wants to do that.
I have one thing to do here because I have some notes from the last meeting that four members
—Governor Bies, and Presidents Santomero, Hoenig, and McTeer
—weren’t able to speak on this topic because it was close to 2:00 p.m.
and we had to adjourn.
I don’t know if any of you four wants to jump in at this stage, but I will call on you in that order.
I also have Governor Gramlich and President Parry as indicating today that they want to say something.
But as a matter of courtesy and organizational discipline, I think we owe to those who were precluded from speaking last time an opportunity to comment today if they wish.
Therefore, Governor Bies, President Santomero, President Hoenig, and President McTeer, in that order, if you want to say anything please do so.
MS.
BIES.
Let me make a couple of comments.
I would hope, as we make the decision on the statement, that we have the staff’s input on the issue of moving up the publication of the minutes.
I say that because I am very concerned about making the press statement the dominant issue.
When people read the minutes, they do have a chance to see the variety of viewpoints expressed at that particular meeting.
Just as we did today, we got around to a consensus.
Some December 9, 2003111 of 133of us are willing to bend or some get to the same answer from a different place, and I think the minutes reflect that more clearly.
<START>I worry that this statement may get very, very long, and I like the idea of keeping the press release cleaner and simpler.<END>
So I’m looking forward to seeing what practically can be done from the minutes perspective.
Second, I personally am very reluctant to go down the path of giving frequent forecasts or making commitments.
To my mind that presumes that we’re more omniscient about what is going to occur in the future than I think we are.
It also raises questions of what to do when confronted with a situation such as we had in the spring with the Iraqi war, when we couldn’t even assess the near-term much less the longer-term outlook.
Presidential elections come up, and a lot of other things happen.
I’m very concerned about trying to give a forecast of the outlook at each regular meeting.
Now, we might want to think about how the Chairman communicates to the Congress twice a year in his testimony on monetary policy;
we can do that separately.
But to routinely try to do a forecast at every six-week interval I find very problematic.
I also want to say that I do like the stress-testing idea.
<START>One of the things that we found out is that the relationship between falling inflation and economic growth<END>
—the Phillips curve kind of tradeoff
—got a bit out of whack this year.
So I like the notion of stress testing these various alternatives.
MR.
FERGUSON.
I have President Santomero next on my list.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
It’s a little hard to pick up from the introductory discussion last time, but let me just respond to what I’m seeing before me.
<START>I think the idea of projecting out two years and continuously forecasting the outlook two years ahead is going to do more harm to our credibility than aid in clarifying our announcements.<END>
So I must admit that I don’t see the use of these types of statements as likely to be a sustainable scenario.
That would be one response.
December 9, 2003112 of 133Second, the question of how much we want to cover in the announcement, which is essentially the issue that President Minehan is suggesting that we think about, is worth addressing directly.
If these options are A, B, and C, then option D ought to be an alternative to pare back the statement.
Maybe the best way to get at some of these questions is to have people give you input in writing on what you’ve shown us today, so that you can determine a way to respond.
If in fact everybody says that “C” is the way to go, that’s fine.
If everybody says “D” is the way to go, that will help the Committee as group figure out what we should do.
I think we still have a lot of open questions here.
The third point I’d make relates to the question of time.
As the Chairman noted, it’s approaching 2:00 p.m.
now.
These are critical decisions, and the question of the time we need to discuss them is becoming an issue.
The Committee may want to think about that
—whether we want to move the announcement to 4:00 p.m.
or start our meetings at 8:00 a.m.
We ought to at least address the timing issue, so that we have an opportunity to talk about these matters in a way that will be constructive.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Tom Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
I’m not quite sure what to say, Roger.
I started out, as I’ve thought about our communications in the last few months, thinking that the earlier release of the minutes would provide us with an opportunity to cut back on the statement.
You indicated in an earlier memo to us that cutting back on the statement, even coupled with an earlier release of the minutes, would be viewed as a step back in terms of the information we provide.
That causes me to think that the forecasts we submit twice a year in preparation for our semiannual reports on monetary policy should be the focus of our communications about the outlook.
I’d rather have the forecasts we provide to the Congress in those reports
—along with the relevant Committee December 9, 2003113 of 133minutes
<START>—be the vehicle we use to put out that range of views rather than the risk statement, which for me has been a very dissatisfying effort to communicate with the markets and whomever else.<END>
So, since we’ve opened up the door to having more options to choose from here, I would say that I really would like to pare back the press release.
And I’d try to provide sooner rather than later a greater sense of the variety of very valuable views among Committee members and the differences that come through that ultimately lead to a consensus.
So that’s my two cents worth.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Okay.
I have Bob McTeer on my list from the last time, and then I have Ned Gramlich, Bob Parry, and Bill Poole.
I think we still have the same dilemma we had last month of having to end our discussion by 2:00 p.m.
MR.
MCTEER.
I agree with Cathy that the statement should be shorter and simpler
—very much so.
<START>As I’ve long argued, I don’t think we did ourselves a favor when we started announcing a bias vote.<END>
I would recommend not having a bias vote.
If we don’t have it, then we’re not being nontransparent by not releasing it.
If it’s fairly obvious which way policy ought to be going at a meeting, I think we ought to just go there rather than do nothing and promise, through a bias vote, that we will likely do it next time.
Whenever we act, people on the outside know pretty much the same information we do;
they don’t really need that much of an explanation of why we voted the way we did.
So I think we leave ourselves much more flexibility if our announcements have fewer moving parts, and we have fewer ways to make a mistake if we just leave out the bias.
If doing that requires releasing the minutes earlier, fine.
That’s all right with me.
But I don’t think we even have to do that.
<START>I’d just say that we’ve found recently that the lengthy press releases and announcements of various biases have not served us very well and we preferred to go back to the old system.<END>
December 9, 2003114 of 133MR. FERGUSON.
Ned Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
I’ll try to be quick.
In terms of writing a relatively formulaic statement with few moving parts, which as you know I tried to do last time, what happens is that all sorts of difficulties arise.
People ask, what are you going to do about this problem?
What are you going to do about that problem?
I don’t want to be so clear on this issue or on that issue.
And the statement just gets more complicated and murkier.
So, frankly, I don’t think that kind of statement is going to work.
My second point is that this group should not think of the minutes as a panacea.
It’s a separate issue.
We might get them out sooner, but even if we do, we’re still going to have to issue a statement on the day of the meeting.
The world is going to want a bottom line, and either we can give it, or somebody else will give it.
<START>So I’d just propose, as Roger suggested, that we treat that as a separate issue and deal with the post-meeting statement as best we can.<END>
Third, there may be an attractive alternative to the options in the material Roger passed out.
It is exactly what we did today
—to issue a short statement after every meeting.
We vote on it and go forward.
What happens is that the situations we face are so checkered and tailored and different that it’s hard to design a formula with few moving parts that will work for every meeting.
If we want to give a statement, it has to be reflective of what we think.
That’s the type of statement we agreed on today
—a short statement that describes what we think is going on in the economy.
If we were to do that, I would say that the statement should be short
—no more than seven or eight sentences.
I personally would recommend that we have a compulsory half-hour period to read a draft of the statement and think about it.
We shouldn’t rush and just ram it through.
We can actually try to do something democratic and then talk about it.
This will result in longer meetings, and that’s all right with me.
I don’t have any more tolerance for meetings December 9, 2003115 of 133than I think most of you have.
But we are setting interest rates that will have an influence throughout the world economy.
It just may take us another two hours to do that.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Bob Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
Roger, Cathy referred to these three options as having lots of moving parts.
I think they are different.
The number of moving parts and the number of things we have to agree on are very different.
One of the proposals has language we’ve actually used for years and never had any problems with
—or at least very few.
While I agree that we don’t want to have a lot of moving parts, I do not think that all three of the options are the same in that regard.
So it seems to me that we can look at these three alternatives.
MR.
FERGUSON.
As I say, this is a judgment call, and obviously, we have nineteen different judges.
Bill, what’s your view?
MR.
POOLE.
I’d like to see a proposal that’s pretty close to A
—I’ll call it A prime
—that would focus on the reasons for the policy decision at the meeting and would have a minimal amount of forward-looking elements.
So when we judge the risks to be roughly balanced, we leave the federal funds rate alone.
<START>When we judge that the risks are becoming unbalanced in a particular direction, we either raise the funds rate or lower it, and that risk assessment would be the explanation of why we took the action we did.<END>
That’s point number one
—that I think we could recast A along those lines.
Second, I would urge that the stress-testing take the actual situations we faced at the meetings of, let’s say, the last five years and determine what we would have done with regard to the statement at each of those meetings.
There may be some scenarios you would want to stress test in addition to that.
But I would like to see history rerun, if you will, to see what the statement would have looked like in September 1998 or whatever under each proposal.
December 9, 2003116 of 133MR. FERGUSON.
Well, I guess I’m going to have the last words because we have only a few minutes left.
Here’s what I’ve noted.
I heard a range of views about these three options, but I don’t think I heard anyone say let’s not stress-test them.
<START>Some of you may ultimately say it’s too complicated and let’s not go to a new type of statement, but I didn’t hear anyone say “please stop the process now.” So I think we need to continue this process, perhaps broadening the stress testing a little, to make sure we pick up a range of situations that we know have occurred over the last five years.<END>
I’m not sure we have to do that for every meeting because one can recall that there were a series of meetings when inflation looked as if it was picking up and a series of meetings when it looked as though inflation was falling off.
So as long as we cover that wide range of circumstances, I think we can respond to the issues raised about stress testing.
The second thing I heard clearly was that we have to keep on the table two options that aren’t specifically set out in this material.
<START>One is simply to cut back on the press statement altogether and minimize the forward-looking aspects of it.<END>
So we’ll include that clearly as an option to be discussed, but there’s no stress testing to do on that
<START>—or no more that our little working group can do with regard to that option.<END>
I’d say the same thing with respect to the focus on the minutes being released early.
That’s clearly something that people want to talk about.
We have to leave enough time in our two-day meeting to cover that, though it’s slightly independent from this other aspect of our communications policy.
We already had planned to discuss expediting the minutes and, as I said, I think that requires some input from Board staff on how they think the market may react, and the pros and cons of taking that step, et cetera.
Those two issues
—what to do on the statement and the minutes
—do interact a little.
As Michelle has warned us a few times, if we appear to be stepping back from transparency in the statement but are giving something else in December 9, 2003117 of 133its stead, that will make a difference in the public reaction.
So those two decisions are interrelated to a degree.
While I in some sense share Bob McTeer’s frustration about the bias statement
—had we never voted on a tilt we’d have to disclose never it
—our problem is that we’ve voted on a tilt for many years.
So eliminating that would lead to great market consternation.
So, of course, we can’t wind the tape back to whenever it was that the Committee decided to first vote on the tilt.
Those are the three things I hear.
The fourth is that, as Ned Gramlich said, in some sense the length of our meetings is a relevant factor in all of this.
I don’t know what the right answer is to that.
But I would say that it’s certainly something we are going to have to consider.
If Ned is right, and I think to some degree he is
—we’re setting interest rates at least for the world’s largest and most complex economy if not for the world
—the attempt of nineteen people to do that in three hours may be more than we can manage.
We may no longer be at a stage where we can do that.
We may decide that we’re no longer just setting rates but we’re talking about the economy and setting up the implications for policy in the future.
We’re setting rates, we’re trying to figure out how best to explain it, and we’re looking forward.
That’s a lot for nineteen people to do in three hours.
MR.
MCTEER.
I think that’s a red herring.
I don’t think anybody in the room would argue that, if we choose one of these options, we will have short meetings.
There’s no argument about that.
MR.
FERGUSON.
No, I’m suggesting that one of the things that may come out of the January meeting is a general consensus that we need to start our meetings a little earlier.
I don’t know.
I’m just saying that that’s part of the discussion we’re going to have to have.
I’m not putting that as an option to be traded off against some of these other things.
December 9, 2003118 of 133MS. MINEHAN.
But, Roger, I think it’s important to recognize that for any of us who favor a shorter, simpler statement, the length of the meeting has nothing whatsoever to do with that preference.
<START>If we had to spend ten hours arguing over policy, I’d be happy to do that.<END>
MR.
FERGUSON.
Well, in fact it’s now 2:00 p.m.
[Laughter] I was trying a filibuster to that.
No, I did say that those two issues are not interchangeable.
We may decide that we want a different length of meeting independent of what we decide about the statement.
That is an issue that has bubbled up and has to be decided.
Now, our Chairman may not be in agreement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Let me just indicate to you that in good congressional tradition the clock has stopped at 2:00 p.m.
MR.
FERGUSON.
It’s up to you how to proceed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Well, unless somebody has some formidably important issues to raise at this point, the meeting is adjourned.
END OF MEETING December 9, 2003119 of 133
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 139
