
Uncertainty on both the demand and the supply sides of the economy makes forecast-based policy especially problematic.
Fortunately, in the current circumstances it’s not as important as it often might be.
Policy is already highly accommodative, and the economy seems to be headed up, but there is enough slack that we can October 28, 200363 of 126afford to wait for reasonably definitive signs before deciding that the economy is on track for drawing down those unused margins of resources and damping disinflation pressures.
<START>Until we see that hard evidence, in my view the risks to output growing around the rate of growth of its potential are balanced, and the risks to inflation are likely to remain downward.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I don’t have much to say this morning.
We’ve planted the flowers.
Now is the time to watch them grow.
There are some risks that a number of you have spoken about
—for example, labor demand and where that is.
One risk that has not been discussed much is fiscal policy.
The staff forecast has the fiscal effect declining very sharply in 2004.
It’s conceivable that, if our friends up on Capitol Hill get religion, some tax cuts may not be extended and we could get some reaction even before then.
It’s also conceivable that, if they don’t get religion, we could see some adjustment in interest rates.
So I think that set of issues has some dangers.
I had been a little worried about the timing because of the pattern of retail sales;
growth was very strong in July and August and weakened quite a bit in September.
First, the numbers could be revised.
<START>Second, the new orders statistics that we got this morning and the strength in housing seem to belie any September weakness, so there may be no particular problem in that pattern.<END>
<START>There are some risks, but basically, to return to my previous metaphor, the flowers seem to be growing at a healthy rate, and I don’t think we ought to change either our policy or our approach.<END>
With that I’m going to obey Dave Stockton’s earlier injunction and cede time
—hopefully a little to myself
—for the discussion on communication policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
October 28, 200364 of 126MR. FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
At every meeting we have to do three things:
(1) assess the economy and risks to the outlook, (2) decide the policy implications, and (3) talk about communication.
Recognizing that the third topic is going to be exciting today
—one hopes
—I’ll try to be brief on the first two.
On the assessment of the economy, it’s clear that the third and fourth quarters seem to be extremely robust.
One recognizes obviously, as Ned Gramlich just mentioned, that the pattern particularly with respect to real PCE growth did slow a little in September.
But that doesn’t leave me with any great concern.
I think the overall pattern of PCE growth is still well maintained.
Similarly, I would point to the demand for both new and existing homes as being very strong;
and this morning’s data on shipments and orders also suggest that the third and fourth quarters are likely to be very robust.
Fortunately, it also appears that the sources of the turnaround seem to be broadening somewhat.
The industrial sector is starting to show some signs of strength.
Industrial production appears to have expanded in the third quarter, and it’s possible that capacity utilization is also starting to firm somewhat.
I’d say that the labor market, which is the biggest question mark we’ve been dealing with, does seem to be giving some early signs of stabilizing.
We haven’t talked much about it in this room today but when the September jobs data came out, that got quite a bit of attention in the press, and we shouldn’t forget that the news was positive.
<START>Similarly, the revisions to the job declines in July and August were all in the right direction and were consistent with a gradual bottoming of the labor market.<END>
The four-week moving average of initial claims declined a bit, and the household survey data suggested that layoffs might be subsiding.
So overall I’d say that the Greenbook was right in terms of moving up expectations for the third and fourth quarters.
October 28, 200365 of 126That leads to the second issue, which is how one assesses the future.
In that regard I can understand and generally feel reasonably comfortable with the logic of the Greenbook forecast.
The Greenbook assumes that the step-up in productivity will continue, though it hasn’t taken in all the increases recently as permanent.
<START>The stimulative policies plus some assumptions about multiplier and accelerator effects all result in an economy that grows at about 5 percent per year, creates jobs and wealth, and then has the unemployment rate falling gradually.<END>
As President Broaddus said, the Greenbook forecast is certainly easy to love.
If I were from the Dallas District I’d probably have a catchy tune about how easy love may be fleeting love.
[Laughter] Let me talk about the risks that are associated with this forecast.
<START>I think it’s easy to see risks on the downside, as Cathy has pointed out.<END>
One of the risks is that so much of what happened in the third quarter and so far in the fourth quarter seems to have been driven by policy stimulus.
Real pre-tax income was essentially unchanged during the summer months of the year.
As that effect starts to wane, there’s a possibility that we won’t get quite the kind of uptick that the Greenbook expects.
And while David and Vincent gave us a number of stories, if you will, about why demand for C&I loans has been very slow to turn around, the bankers I’ve talked to certainly are worried about it.
They seem to think that it may really be a sign of slower growth than the Greenbook forecast suggests.
I recently had a meeting with the real estate roundtable, and across the board that group was quite subdued.
So some anecdotal information suggests that our staff forecast is a bit more hopeful than many people, at least many in the real world, are at this stage.
Add to that the fact that the Greenbook forecast is already above the Blue Chip consensus, and it seems that some concern about the downside risks is warranted.
On the upside, though, I think one must say that rarely at this stage of an expansion has the economy seen this kind of fiscal and monetary stimulus
<START>—with interest rates extremely low, October 28, 200366 of 126prices stable, the dollar coming off, productivity increasing, financial conditions turning, and earnings relatively strong.<END>
Those and a variety of other factors could lead to some upside potential around the forecast.
So I’d say that even around our relatively optimistic forecast, while love may be fleeting, the risks are relatively balanced.
With respect to policy, I suspect that, when we get to that point of our discussion, there’s not going to be very much to say.
With respect to communication I, like others, will restrain myself as best I can except to say that I believe the interaction between policy and communication today is such that the Committee would be very well advised to take a fairly cautious approach.
We have a great deal to discuss, and I’d hate for us to get ahead of ourselves in the statement that we make at 2:15 today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
I have a couple of comments.
After two people in a row have said that they’re going to be brief, I think I should say exactly the same thing, and I will.
Over the past week I’ve talked to a number of bankers whose comments essentially reinforced a lot of what we have heard around the table.
Two community bankers, one in the upper Midwest and one in the Southwest, had exactly the same observation.
They are feeling additional competitive pressures from the nation’s largest banks as those banks come after the small business market.
That supports the appetite for increased risks that we’ve seen around the country.
I think it supports also the notion that the slack demand for commercial loans has forced banks to reach toward other kinds of loan opportunities.
A regional lender in the Midwest had a slightly different perspective, but it was along the same lines.
He noted the difference between the response he was getting from his front-line lenders as opposed to what he was getting from the credit department people.
The front line people felt that there was a good deal of increased activity but October 28, 200367 of 126that it had not yet translated into loans.
The one exception was lending to businesses that were exercising purchase options for currently leased facilities.
That, too, supports the view that a lot of the lending is either to lock in liquidity or to restructure and improve the overall ability of business entities to finance growth internally, which is what I think I heard Dave Stockton and others say.
In talking to some contacts in institutional and custodial service businesses, a couple of other trends came to light.
One was another reaffirmation of the shift by consumers into equities, a trend that had been obvious but has become even more obvious within the last six weeks.
But the institutional investors were moving offshore, in many cases to emerging Asia, which is consistent also with the story in the Greenbook in terms of expectations for growth there.
Pulling together what I’ve been hearing
—notably the change in risk appetites, which was probably the most obvious
—it appears that a lot of lending continues to be for balance sheet restructuring.
Much of the lending tends to be in anticipation of improvement in the underlying economy.
To the extent that there are increases in capital expenditures, they are not being reflected in new C&I loans in the banking industry.
<START>But in comparing the feedback we were getting with regard to inhibitions to capital investment six months ago versus now, I had the impression that there was a significant change.<END>
Six months ago we were hearing the terms “psychology” or “psychological,” whereas now in describing the underlying economy contacts are using words like “confidence” or “optimistic” or perhaps “cautious.” The use of the word “psychology” suggested that there was an irrationality to the decisions on capital spending
—that the decisions were not based on an analysis of the underlying data but were independent of the data.
We were looking at strength in consumer demand over the period, and that was not being taken into account by the business sector.
Now at least the underlying economic data are being October 28, 200368 of 126analyzed and taken into account to some degree.
So while we have not yet seen the same traction as in previous recoveries, the change in attitudes is very obvious.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to make one comment on current conditions and then talk a bit more about the longer-run part of the Greenbook forecast.
I was struck as I looked at the Greenbook forecast about where we are with regard to business investment in this expansion and by some of the information on capital spending that we’re getting from various business surveys, much of which is included in the Greenbook materials.
We’ve already noted that corporate cash flow is very strong and that we’re beginning to see some firming up of business investment.
But the responses to the qualitative questions that are asked in surveys clearly show that businesses are reluctant to expand.
Nevertheless, I think there is a tone that says we’re seeing a floor here;
we’re beginning to get out of this slump in investment.
That slump was the root of this business slowdown and, as Governor Olson was just mentioning, the words are starting to turn positive.
But the vigor of corporate expansion has yet to take hold.
I think the recent information shows again that we clearly have a way to go.
It worries me when I look at how much stop and go we’ve had in the economy in the last two years.
The Greenbook forecast is assuming that there are no real shocks coming.
We’ve had a number of shocks in the past few years.
Last year business inventories grew, but then we had the shock of a war in the spring.
There have been so many starts and stops in this recovery that it may take a little longer to prove that there is some stability out there and to get businesses into an expansion mode versus just a replacement mode.
Clearly their financial strength is extraordinary.
The corporate cash flow and earnings numbers coming out this quarter all look very, very strong.
October 28, 200369 of 126In thinking about the longer-term forecast and where we are heading, I was struck, too, by the wonderful optimism in the Greenbook forecast compared with some of the outside forecasts.
I just want to comment on two aspects of this that I’m still sorting through in my own mind.
One is that we’ve had an extraordinary run in productivity over the last few quarters.
Yet when we look forward, productivity growth for the last six quarters of the Greenbook forecast falls below the recent numbers.
I understand that a big part of the productivity performance is cyclical.
But the projected drop in productivity growth is coming right when the economy is really picking up.
So we have this tension in the forecast, I think, where we see employment growing
—extraordinary job growth
—and productivity slowing.
<START>Yet we still have inflation trending down until the tail end of the forecast period.<END>
In the Street, as market observers talk about expectations
—and it’s a factor in our communication policy
<START>—they say that once employment starts expanding, inflation is going to pick up.<END>
That is going to be one of the challenges we face if we believe in the Greenbook forecast.
In fact, of all the alternative scenarios, there’s only one that results in an inflation rate that’s within hailing distance of 2 percent.
And that’s due only to the fact that people’s inflation expectations are higher than actual inflation.
<START>Basically in this forecast, depending on the inflation measure, we will have had four or five years of inflation numbers that start with a 1 or below, which would be an extraordinary period of low inflation.<END>
That psychology is not what most observers have in their mindset, nor is it part of the business recovery models that we see in the marketplace.
So we need to think about how we talk about these issues going forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bernanke.
MR.
BERNANKE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was interested in the likely evolution of the federal funds rate over the next two years.
So I asked the staff to use their best fitting October 28, 200370 of 126estimated Taylor rules together with both Greenbook and private sector forecasts to project some sample interest rate paths.
<START>The rules the staff chose were a backward-looking Taylor rule estimated over the 1988-98 period and a forward-looking, or forecast-based, Taylor rule estimated over the same period using FOMC central tendency forecasts on the right-hand side plus some additional data assumptions.<END>
By the way, this latter rule is the one discussed in some detail in Dave Lindsey’s magnum opus on communication.
<START>Both Taylor rules allowed for error correction terms<END>
—that is, a lagged interest rate in the equation.
The projections were run using actual data plus either Greenbook or Blue Chip forecasts on the right-hand side and then compared with funds rate forecasts obtained from the fed funds futures markets.
Note that this exercise treats the Greenbook forecast as given.
No attempt was made to reconcile the funds rate projection obtained with the funds rate assumptions used in deriving the forecast.
Let me summarize a couple of interesting results from this exercise.
First, the backward-looking rule would have the current funds rate at about 1.50 percent.
The actual current value of 1 percent presumably reflects in part our insurance policy against deflation.
Assuming that the extra 50 basis points are phased out in a linear way over the next two years, the path that is suggested by the backward-looking rule would go about as follows:
It’s currently at 1 percent;
it would be 1.25 percent by the end of the first quarter of next year, 1.50 percent at the end of the second quarter, 2.25 percent at the end of 2004, and finally 3.50 percent at the end of 2005.
The backward-looking rule applied to the Blue Chip data gave a fairly similar, though slightly more aggressive, path through 2004.
The Blue Chip data don’t go out far enough to do a projection through 2005.
<START>What I found most interesting about the results using the backward-looking Taylor rule is that they correspond extremely closely to what comes out of the futures market.<END>
The numbers are almost exactly the same.
<START>So the main lesson I learned from this exercise is that October 28, 200371 of 126the market is using historical relationships and backward-looking type Taylor rules to figure out what we’re going to be doing in the future.<END>
There was an interesting contrast to the results when I used the forward-looking rule.
In particular, the forward-looking Taylor rule implies a much slower tightening process.
<START>Indeed according to that projection, the funds rate will reach only 1.50 percent by the end of 2004 rather than the 2.25 percent forecast by both the futures market and the backward-looking rule.<END>
The Greenbook forecast horizon doesn’t permit a projection through 2005, though, so I couldn’t make that comparison.
Why the difference?
Mechanically, the difference arises because the forward-looking rule puts a high weight on inflation expectations, and of course, using the Greenbook forecast we have a very low inflation rate expected over the forecast period.
So that’s the mechanical reason.
Which of these rules should we take more seriously?
Personally, I see some advantages in the forward-looking rule for two reasons.
One is that it’s a true real-time rule
—that is, it estimates reaction functions given actual forecasts available at the time the policy decision was taken.
Second, as Governor Bies mentioned, we’re now in a period that is very unusual, and historical relationships may not work.
So it’s useful that the forward-looking rule can take into account explicitly how forecasts affect current policy decisions.
The implications of this, I think, are interesting.
To me it says that our policy stance is going to depend very much on what we think inflation is going to do.
Suppose we buy the Greenbook forecast on inflation.
I’m not making a judgment here;
<START>I personally think that inflation will remain low and stable over the forecast period, but not everyone does.<END>
But if we do agree with that inflation outlook, then at least based on this estimated rule our policy tightening should be slower and more gradual than suggested by historical relationships or by the funds rate futures markets.
That leads finally to October 28, 200372 of 126two conclusions.
One is that we should be especially vigilant about the inflation rate and where we think it’s going to go.
Second, we have an ongoing communication issue.
If this is the way that policy proceeds, over time in one way or another we will have to bring expectations in the market in line with our actual policy.
Let me make one brief comment on communication.
I just want to say that I very much appreciate the contributions and thoughts people have had, and I’m very open to the kinds of modifications that have been suggested.
But I would echo Governor Ferguson’s suggestion that for the time being we go relatively slowly.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you very much.
We now go to Vincent Reinhart.
MR.
REINHART.2 Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will be referring to the materials that Carol Low handed out during the coffee break.
As shown in the top left panel of your first exhibit, investors seem to have raised the path expected for the federal funds rate over the course of 2004.
They are still counting on cumulative tightening to bring the federal funds rate to 3 percent by the end of 2005, but they are now betting on the Committee to be a bit quicker in getting there.
That said, market participants apparently don’t anticipate that process to begin at this meeting or the next.
Futures rates over the balance of the year are unchanged at 1 percent.
Moreover, as shown in the table at the right, primary dealers do not expect any substantive change in the economic assessment issued this afternoon.
With only a couple of exceptions, they expect you to announce that risks are balanced with respect to your growth objectives and tilted to the downside with regard to price stability, with the latter remaining the predominant risk.
Other manifestations of this shift in expectations are given in the middle panels.
The solid black line in the middle left panel plots a measure of uncertainty about the federal funds rate expected in the next six months.
<START>For most of the summer and early fall, investors have been relatively confident that the funds rate will remain near current levels six months hence, no doubt importantly because of your assurances in the statements of August and September that policy can be kept accommodative for a considerable period.<END>
In recent weeks, though, there has been a growing sense that a turning point may be drawing closer, and this measure of implied volatility has moved higher.
The middle right panel plots the distribution of the federal funds rate about six months ahead derived from options quotes yesterday (the solid bars) and just before the September meeting (the dashed line).
More weight is now being placed on funds rates in the neighborhood of 1½ to 1¾, apparently at the expense of odds on the funds rate holding at 1 percent or going lower.
Aside from the 2 The materials used by Mr. Reinhart are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).
October 28, 200373 of 126encouraging data on the economy, developments in financial markets may have made investors more confident about the outlook.
As can be seen in the bottom panels of the exhibit, financial market conditions have eased considerably on net this year, including a modest contribution made over the intermeeting period.
I list this improvement in financial conditions first at the top of the next exhibit, which outlines the case for an unchanged target federal funds rate.
You may view eased financial conditions to be one consequence of the current accommodative stance of monetary policy.
As shown in the middle panel, the real federal funds rate, represented by the solid line, lies below the range of estimated equilibrium real rates.
Indeed, a firming outlook for the economy has meant that r* is an upwardly moving target.
Keeping the real federal funds rate unchanged in such circumstances implies a widening interest-rate gap.
That may be especially troubling if you think that pressures on resources may emerge a bit faster than the staff forecasts.
As shown in the bottom left panel, in the Greenbook projection, the near-term surprise in the level of real GDP has been carried over the entire forecast period, the difference between the dotted line for September and the red line for October.
Particularly if you thought that there was some risk that the most recent surprise also tilted up that red line some or that the speed of its ascent represents looming pressures on inflation independent of the output gap, you might be inclined, at a minimum, to keep policy on hold.
<START>Financial market participants may be expressing just those sorts of concerns in the upward climb in inflation compensation as measured from the Treasury market (the bottom right panel).<END>
These measures have moved higher looking over the next five years (the black line) and from five to ten years ahead (the red line).
<START>Of course, inflation compensation is a far-from-perfect proxy for inflation expectations, and these measures have not broken noticeably out of their range of the previous four years, but you might believe a neighborhood of 2 to 2½ percent to be on the high side of your objective.<END>
To be sure, a pickup in pressures on inflation is not part of the staff forecast.
<START>Indeed, the case for easing 25 basis points, which is laid out at the top of exhibit 3, could rest on the view that, as resource slack lingers, inflation may drift into an unacceptably low region<END>
—if it is not already there.
<START>In the Greenbook baseline, the unemployment rate, seen as a solid line in the middle left panel, makes only a gradual approach to its natural rate of 5 percent by the end of 2005.<END>
Policy ease at this time might be viewed as helpful in working down economic slack more quickly.
Moreover, such monetary policy impetus would be welcomed after the fact if a less robust expansion eventuates.
In Part 1 of the Greenbook, the staff used the FRB/US model to consider what would happen if the economic recovery faltered at the beginning of next year, the implications of which are plotted as the dashed line in the middle left panel for the unemployment rate and in the middle right panel for PCE inflation.
<START>Worse still for the unemployment rate would be if this hesitation in economic expansion led market participants to move up their desired compensation for risk (the dotted lines).<END>
<START>In circumstances in which actual inflation is low, inflation expectation are fairly well contained, and a sizable output gap remains, putting just a bit of weight on the adverse outcomes of the dashed and dotted lines might incline October 28, 200374 of 126you toward policy ease.<END>
That inclination might be strengthened by the fact that inflation is projected to fall to below ¾ percent in 2005 in either of these scenarios.
Last, at recent meetings, some members took encouragement from the performance of financial flows as evidence that there was some fundamental support to economic growth.
As reported in the bottom left panel, on a twelve-month-change basis, M2 growth has turned down in its most recent readings.
We think that relates importantly to the effects of a slowing of mortgage refinancing on liquid deposits and so is not a reading on the vigor of the economy, but we may be wrong.
<START>Concern about the performance of M2 might be underscored by the fact that other financial flows, including, as seen at the right, business loan growth, commercial paper issuance, and bond issuance, have all been anemic of late.<END>
The remaining issue for your consideration centers on language, which is the subject of your final exhibit.
Two points of procedure about that language.
First, we included a fuller discussion of alternatives for the wording of the announcement in the Bluebook, in the hope of getting some feedback from the members.
We did get some, and in the future we will circulate on the afternoon before the meeting a summary of all the comments received by close of business Friday.
Second, in the Bluebook, we assumed that you intend to fit this afternoon’s statement within the current structure and reserve any discussion of changes to that structure for later.
<START>Within that structure, the top panel repeats a table from the Bluebook and shows that there are only a limited number of combinations of the assessments of the risks to growth and inflation that seem plausible among the nine that are logically possible.<END>
<START>The current words lie squarely in the blue box, in which risks to sustainable economic growth are seen as balanced and inflation more likely to fall than not, with low inflation being the predominant concern.<END>
While the economic outlook has improved, much of that improvement remains a forecast, not firmly established in the data
—especially so for readings on the labor market.
That said, spending indicators have shown vigor, and the most likely transition in the near term would presumably be a move from that blue box to the yellow box, in which the risks to sustainable economic growth are viewed as weighted to the upside.
<START>Moving the assessment on the inflation outlook to balanced (the green box) seems likely to be a subsequent step, given the current room for the economy to run before resource slack is worked down.<END>
The Committee’s willingness to change the language at all must presumably be related to how it views the last sentence in the August and September announcements, the relevant portion of which is repeated in the middle-left panel.
You might be comfortable in repeating that “policy accommodation can be maintained for a considerable period” if you believe the Greenbook forecast is likely.
<START>The staff’s assessment of the current shortfall of the level of aggregate demand below that of potential aggregate supply, the likely expansion of aggregate supply over time, and the relative unresponsiveness of inflation to diminishing slack in resource utilization combine to suggest that the Committee could keep the funds rate at 1 percent through 2004 and foster acceptable economic performance.<END>
An examination of private-sector October 28, 200375 of 126opinions, however, may leave you with more concerns about the definition of a “considerable period.” As shown in the middle-right panel, readings on money-market futures contracts suggest sizable weight on policy tightening that brings the funds rate to 1¼ percent by midyear.
<START>Wall Street economists, the solid line representing the median of a survey of investment bankers, also expect firming, but a little bit more delayed.<END>
As outlined at the bottom left, dropping the sentence at this meeting may risk an outsized market reaction, as investors begin to wonder if the path for policy embedded in futures rates is not aggressive enough for your taste.
One possibility would be to convert the reference from calendar to economic time.
That is, the Committee=s definition of a considerable period could be made contingent upon the outlook for further disinflation.
One such possibility, given at the bottom right, would have the statement read that “the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be maintained for the considerable period it currently assesses will be required to foster the moderation of disinflationary pressures.” The Committee considered such a change at the September meeting, felt it to be a close call, and ultimately decided that altering the language would draw more attention than warranted.
You may feel yourself still to be in that position at this meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you.
Questions for Vincent?
MR.
PARRY.
<START>Vincent, in the top panel of exhibit 4, there is a column labeled “unwelcome fall.” One thing we’ve learned in the last two quarters is that productivity has been extraordinarily strong.<END>
Certainly the probability of a decline in inflation from, let’s say, the level in the forecast may be reasonably remote, but the proportion of it that may be welcome may have changed because of a shift in supply.
<START>There’s no mechanism for reflecting the fact that not all declines in inflation are unwelcome.<END>
MR.
REINHART.
Well, I would say that, on one level, rapid growth in aggregate supply only raises the bar for the growth of aggregate demand that the Committee should desire to get the outcomes it wants.
<START>So in that sense, there still could be unwelcome declines in inflation.<END>
MR.
PARRY.
Of course.
MR.
REINHART.
But they would not be associated with problems relating to the economic expansion.
In general the linking of “unwelcome” and “disinflation” or “a pickup in inflation” may pose a problem in the current structure of this language.
It’s a problem that October 28, 200376 of 126President Stern also referred to in his discussion of disinflation as not necessarily being problematic.
But I would say that, from the Committee’s perspective, a decline in inflation from current levels, while perhaps not posing a threat of serious damage to the economy if it is due to a rapid increase in the aggregate supply, may send the inflation rate below your longer-run objective.
MR.
PARRY.
But it appears as though it would be less unwelcome than we may have thought before we knew what was happening to productivity.
MR.
REINHART.
<START>In that regard, you do have your other assessment to separate the distinction between less unwelcome and more unwelcome.<END>
<START>An unwelcome decline in inflation that was associated with a growing resource gap would presumably be closer to those pernicious deflations that members have expressed concern about in the past.<END>
A decline in inflation associated with balanced economic growth or even upward pressures on economic growth would have different implications for policy.
One thing that’s fairly clear to me in working on the communication policy is that Committee members really want a lot of different toggle switches in the statement to express contingencies like this.
MR.
PARRY.
Well, in my effort to communicate better with you, I feel better.
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Just remember, if you want to parse words, “unwelcome disinflation” is part of disinflation.
You can size it however you so choose.
That’s what our communication problem is getting us into.
Further questions for Vincent?
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
In regard to President Parry’s comment, perhaps the problem here is that we’re trying to combine two different issues regarding inflation in this chart
<START>—namely, the probability of inflation moving up or down as currently forecast and a qualitative evaluation of October 28, 200377 of 126that.<END>
Maybe we should separate the two
<START>—define the risk of inflation falling, say, which the Committee might then describe as desirable or undesirable depending upon the circumstances.<END>
What I’m struck by is the asymmetry reflected in this box.
<START>We have value judgments associated with the columns but no value judgments associated with the rows.<END>
It’s not clear why we’d necessarily want to start off by having value judgments associated asymmetrically.
MR.
REINHART.
I view that as a serious problem with the current structure of the language.
In the proposals discussed in the two memos that I circulated, I separated out the first two statements as being declarative statements about your forecast couched in probability terms
<START>—the probability of inflation rising or falling and the probability of growth above or below a sustainable rate.<END>
Then I ladled in the welfare judgments, the judgments about relative costs in your objective function.
That is, everything that relates to risk management in a central bank is put into that third sentence.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
Essentially I’m agreeing with that approach, given the difficulty of communicating the alternative, which blends the two together.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
The more we go into how to slice and dice and stress-test all of these various formulations
—whether it’s the current one or the one Vincent proposed in his October 17 memo
—the more difficult and complicated this whole process becomes.
It is fraught with untoward circumstances or unintended consequences.
I think we need to take a big step back
—not today, for purposes of this meeting
—in considering these various proposals.
As I and a lot of other people around the table suggested, given that we’re not likely to change policy, let’s stay as close as we can to what we have been saying.
Maybe we can fiddle with it or add October 28, 200378 of 126words to the “considerable period” or maybe not, depending on how we come out on that.
But I’d say leave it alone.
The atmosphere is really difficult out there, and I don’t think the recent newspaper articles did us one bit of good in terms of providing us with some flexibility to change things.
Even if that were desirable now
—and I wouldn’t agree that it is
—I believe we really need to think about this a lot longer and a lot harder.
I for one would want to take a big step back and even think about whether we want to continue with a formulation that came out of the old tilt.
Why do we want to continue doing that?
<START>Why do we want to put out information about the future that we’re all uncomfortable with?<END>
<START>Saying why we did what we did has enough of a future impact without adding all this information about risks when we realize that there’s a great deal of uncertainty about the risks.<END>
That’s a discussion for another time
—maybe at lunch or in January.
I just want to encourage us, please, not to do anything very different this time.
There’s so much to talk about just in terms of this grid, let alone the seven or eight variations that you put in your October 17 memo.
Also there’s Ned’s proposal, which I think has some attractiveness to it.
Let’s just stop now and try to figure out what we’re going to do.
We can have a little conversation over lunch and take it up again in January.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further questions for Vincent?
If not, let me just say that Cathy is raising a general concern that I think we all share.
One can see it by trying to use language to calibrate mechanisms that are digital.
Every technician will tell you that that leads you nowhere.
In any event, we’re going to get a clarification of the outlook in the next couple of months, and it will be significant in the sense that Christmas sales will be a fundamental test of consumer attitudes going forward.
That will resolve the issue of what part of the tax cut actually was spent in the third quarter
—75 percent according to Goldman Sachs, significantly less October 28, 200379 of 126according to most others.
We’ll know that by the time of the January meeting.
The labor markets are either turning or they’re not.
The evidence suggests that they are, but again, we’ll need more time to make that judgment.
Obviously capital spending is a crucial issue, and that is apparently improving.
Again the question is, if I may use a new term, whether it is “slogging” away.
[Pause] There are not many foreign policy buffs around this table!
[Laughter] MR. GRAMLICH.
That’s another reason for not using the term, by the way.
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If it turns out that the economy, after going through this recent surge, simmers down very dramatically and indeed exhibits weakness, then from a policy point of view we’re obviously well positioned at this stage.
I think a weakening in economic activity is unlikely.
I believe it’s more likely that evidence of an old-fashioned business cycle expansion is beginning to emerge.
The pieces are falling into place.
Some are little things like the upward revisions to profits, which have been exceptionally extensive.
We haven’t seen anything like these numbers since the height of the boom back in the 1990s.
We’re seeing for the first time this year an uptick in the long-term outlook for earnings per share.
Unlike in previous periods, the economy is moving forward largely on the basis of final demand, as I think Dave mentioned.
<START>There is no question that in July and August firms were liquidating inventories, and the data we have for September confirm that the liquidation continued through the end of the quarter.<END>
<START>My recollection is that, when I saw the original Greenbook projection that had inventory liquidation continuing through the rest of the year, I was incredulous.<END>
I was even incredulous about it continuing in the third quarter.
But clearly that’s what we’re seeing.
Indeed, the data on durable goods inventories for manufacturing confirmed that this morning.
It is probably the case that motor vehicle inventories did rise in October, just judging from the falloff in sales.
<START>But there is no evidence as yet to suggest any October 28, 200380 of 126significant inventory accumulation, and in a way that’s probably good rather than bad because we’re looking forward to an acceleration.<END>
Purchasing managers at manufacturing firms, who are probably best positioned to have a sense of whether their customers’ inventories are high or low, are reporting that they are extraordinarily low.
Since all inventories by definition are produced by manufacturers, with the exception of a few items in mining, lumber, and the like, these people are very focused on the process.
Basically they are saying that the inventory situation is getting tighter and tighter.
So there’s an upside risk here, which is something we have not seen for quite a substantial period of time.
If the economy starts to heat up, obviously we’re going to have to create a credible exit strategy from maintaining an accommodative stance for a considerable period.
We have a lot of alternatives, and maybe that’s part of the problem.
We may have just too many widgets to push and too many permutations and combinations with nineteen people to get any single set of views.
I think we could remind the market that we first used the term “accommodative” in early 2002 when we moved the funds rate down to 1.75 percent.
Bob Parry has raised that issue publicly.
He got a lot of attention.
[Laughter] Anything that anybody on this Committee says gets a lot of attention, largely because the truth of the matter is that we are in uncharted waters.
<START>In our personal experiences we have never been at a point when the inflation rate for all practical purposes is zero.<END>
We have reached price stability.
In previous periods when the economy was turning and inflation rates were 3, 4, or 5 percent, a preemptive policy move made a lot of sense.
But what are we preempting from when inflation is effectively at zero?
What that means is that we have a lot of time to sit and watch the process going forward.
But as Ben Bernanke pointed out, one possible explanation of what the markets are doing is that they are merely replicating our past behavior, which is called backward-looking analysis.
I think that’s right.
That’s what October 28, 200381 of 126markets always do.
It is going to be a fascinating process if this economy, as is most likely, begins to show far greater signs of underlying strength and sustainability.
We’re going to have to work our way through to determining where we need to be on the funds rate.
I ought to emphasize that we have a number of ways of doing that.
Obviously, the accommodation issue can be redefined.
We can return to an assessment of balanced inflation risks.
<START>We can say that the risks to sustainable growth are on the upside.<END>
Or we can rephrase how we state the balance of risks.
And we can make all of the adjustments with different timing.
<START>For example, there’s no reason that we cannot start raising the short-term funds rate and still have the next sentence of our statement indicate that we will remain accommodative for a considerable period of time.<END>
Or we can decide to drop that statement at the first stage.
But let me emphasize this:
<START>The bottom line is that we should have the policy that is the right policy.<END>
If we actually allow this whole question of who says what and how the press will read it
—whether it’s up, down, or sideways
—to affect our judgment regarding the implementation of the optimum policy, we are making a very bad mistake.
The people out there who are in either the cheering or the booing section know less than we do, and they demonstrate that periodically.
Whenever I suspect otherwise they dissuade me!
[Laughter] So the first thing we have to do is to decide what we want to do.
Then as a wholly separate exercise we need to determine how we want to explain it, in what manner, and to whom.
If we intermix these two issues, we’re making a very bad mistake.
If we allow the movement in rates to reflect how we expect markets to respond, we’re going to find that we all presumed that if we move X the markets will respond Y, but in fact when we move X the markets will do something else.
We can’t be sure how the markets will respond.
There is no solution to that October 28, 200382 of 126dilemma.
In my view, we have to keep that in mind in the discussion we’re going to have shortly.
We have to separate policy from communication.
Having said that, we do have to determine what we want to say in our press statement after we decide what we want to do on policy.
I agree with those around the table who have cautioned against doing anything significantly different today.
I say that because I have no idea how the markets will respond.
I know everyone has his or her own view about that, and I appreciate that.
But anybody who says he has a clue about how the market will react is in my judgment expressing a lack of knowledge.
As far as I’m concerned, the policy issue today is straightforward.
I think there’s no issue with respect to the appropriate policy.
Policy is actually working well.
<START>It’s hard to remember this, but not too long ago we were looking at the possibility of an awesome downside on the inflation rate, and we weren’t sure we had the tools to deal with it.<END>
We know exactly what to do on the upside.
We may not get it right, but we know what to do.
As a consequence, we may have looked at the Greenbook forecast six months ago and asked what Dave Stockton was smoking.
Well, whatever it was, it was pretty good!
[Laughter] My bottom line is that at this stage we have to make minor adjustments in the first paragraph.
We can’t talk about weak labor markets;
we need to say we’re in a period where they’ve stabilized or something like that.
But I’d just leave the rest of the wording alone and ship it out and go work on something else.
That is my recommendation, and I’d be interested in your reactions.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I support you completely.
Since we’re into metaphors today, here’s mine.
<START>With regard to the communication part of your recommendation, with the second paragraph I think we have dug ourselves into a hole and we’re trying very hard to get out October 28, 200383 of 126of it but all we’re doing is getting in deeper.<END>
Let’s put the shovel down, think about it, and climb out of this hole later.
That’s why I’d say leave the paragraph exactly the same.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole, what do we do about the shovel?
[Laughter] MR. POOLE.
I was going to comment that I think the minutes that will come out on Thursday are going to help a lot.
On page 14 there’s some important language that emphasizes that the “considerable period” has to be interpreted in the context of the evolution of the economy, not in the context of calendar time.
I believe that language is going to help to get us to a much better position in the future.
I would also note that there’s an old saying that the best tax system is an old tax system.
I think that’s probably true of communication strategy as well.
We need to develop a standard strategy.
<START>If we’re going to be reviewing our communication policy at some length later, it’s best not to have a whole series of changes along the way until we complete our review.<END>
In the meantime, we should let the issue sit as quietly as possible.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I meant to say that, and I don’t think I said it explicitly.
We really ought to have the simulated exit strategy spelled out in full detail before we take the first step.
We have to know where we want to end up under various conditions so that we don’t find ourselves as perpetual ditch diggers.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
I concur with your recommendation, Mr. Chairman, and I like Tom’s metaphor.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
I concur with the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
October 28, 200384 of 126MR. SANTOMERO.
I concur with your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
One thing I will say is that this exercise has convinced me that trying to write down every single contingent response in a group of nineteen people is extraordinarily challenging.
These memos and various options may be worth reading but not necessarily worth doing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I very much agree with your suggestion, Mr. Chairman, and I also like Tom’s metaphor.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
I agree with your recommendations, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
I agree with your recommendations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
I agree with your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
I’m comfortable with your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
First Vice President Stewart.
MR.
STEWART.
I concur.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bernanke.
MR.
BERNANKE.
I concur with both parts of your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
I support the recommendation.
October 28, 200385 of 126CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
I agree with the recommendation, with the understanding that we’ll have a thorough discussion of this issue in the future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
I agree with your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
MR.
MCTEER.
So do I. MR.
GRAMLICH.
I concur.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Would the Secretary read the appropriate language?
MR.
BERNARD.
The wording is on page 10 of the Bluebook continuing onto page 11:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 1 percent.” With regard to the risk-assessment language, “Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes the risks to its outlook for sustainable economic growth over the next several quarters are balanced.<END>
The risks to its outlook for inflation over the next several quarters are weighted toward the downside.
And taken together, the balance of risks to its objectives is weighted toward the downside in the foreseeable future.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Call the roll please.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Governor Bernanke Yes Governor Bies Yes President Broaddus Yes October 28, 200386 of 126Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Guynn Yes Governor Kohn Yes President Moskow Yes Governor Olson Yes President Parry Yes First Vice President Stewart Yes CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Our next meeting is Tuesday, December 9.
Excuse me, I forgot to mention that there’s essentially no change in the press statement.
Now, what’s your pleasure with regard to the discussion on communications?
Do you want to talk over lunch or do you want to recess and come back?
MR.
REINHART.
What I propose, Mr. Chairman, is for everybody to go get lunch and come back to the table.
When everyone settles down, I can read some brief remarks, and then we can proceed with the discussion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Okay, that sounds good.
Is that satisfactory to everybody?
Good, let’s go to lunch.
[Lunch break] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Let’s turn to Vincent Reinhart.
MR.
REINHART.3 Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’ll be referring to the material called “Briefing on FOMC Communications Policy” that Carol Low handed out while you were getting lunch.
One of my favorite quotes, which offers some perspective on my work on the Committee=s communication policy over the past few months, comes from William of Orange, who held that “you need not hope to undertake nor succeed to persevere.” When it comes to the structure of the Committee’s assessment of the outlook, I can report to the members that your Secretary has undertaken and persevered but sees little hope of success.
To raise the odds just a bit, I would appreciate it if you would use the time until 2:00 p.m.
to provide some feedback on a few key issues.
To facilitate that discussion, I have listed in the first exhibit some alternative ways of assessing risks.
I started with the pre-March balance-of-risks language to establish that some progress in the Committee’s communication has been made.
The second 3 The materials used by Mr. Reinhart are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).
October 28, 200387 of 126panel gives the current wording, the next is the proposal in my memo dated October 22, and the last is the suggestion of Governor Gramlich circulated at that same time.
These panels are for your reference.
What I will focus on are the four questions listed in exhibit 2.
<START>In particular, do you have a clear preference for the risk assessment among the various proposals that have circulated?<END>
If there is a basic structure identified today, then the task of homing in on specific language will be easier.
Second, in that process it would be helpful if the Committee provided guidance as to whether it wants a bilateral or a multilateral approach to arriving at new language.
By that I mean that I can get feedback from the members individually and iterate on new drafting language or I can look for opportunities to schedule a discussion of these matters by the full Committee.
A middle ground would be to consider charging a subcommittee with the task, but only a few members have expressed enthusiasm for that.
Third, how much importance do you place on wrapping up this issue quickly?
Many of you have expressed concurrence with postponing the adoption of new language, often with the comment that you’d rather have it done right than done quickly.
A countervailing consideration, however, is the observation that the economy seems to be improving, perhaps at a pace that would make you anticipate changing at least some part of the risk assessment in the near future.
If so, there is a question of sequencing.
Do you want to grapple with modifying the existing language to express a new tilt, or would such a transition be an appropriate time to adopt a new structure?
Fourth, when do you want to talk about this next?
Looking at the calendar, there are three immediate opportunities.
I could set aside time on the December 9 agenda after the policy decision to consider the matter, and you could decide perhaps not to be bound by the 2:00 p.m.
deadline.
I could arrange a dinner meeting on December 8, the night before that meeting.
Third, this could be the subject of the discussion on the Tuesday afternoon of your next two-day meeting in late January.
With any of those options, though, you might want to take into consideration how the public will react to news that the Committee is once again talking about communications, especially if you are not certain that the conversation will bring closure, at least for now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Why don’t you put each question on the table and ask for comments.
MR.
REINHART.
The first question is, Is there any clear preference as to the basic structure of the assessment of the outlook?
October 28, 200388 of 126MR. GRAMLICH.
Mr. Chairman, before we talk about that, could I say a word about my draft wording?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Certainly.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
As I’ve said before, I’ve not fancied myself a communications expert, so I do this a bit reluctantly.
But the thing I’m increasingly having trouble with in our statements is that our assessments of the economy are not benchmarked.
<START>As I said in my memo, the phrase “sustainable growth” sometimes seems to mean that the economy is growing at the normal rate, but that growth could be associated with any unemployment rate.<END>
Sometimes the term means closing the output gap.
In the top paragraph on page 10 of the Bluebook, Vincent actually says that if the “sustainable economic growth” sentence means this, then one thing follows, and if the sentence means something else, then another thing follows.
<START>We’re dealing with enough uncertainties here without having uncertainty about what our own language means.<END>
I think we could clearly do better.
With regard to inflation, describing it as rising or falling doesn’t help me.
I’d like to see our assessment of inflation compared with some desirable level.
So I have suggested a version that attempts to put in benchmarks.
That’s all it does;
I tried to stick with the rest of the language as much as possible.
I have received a lot of favorable comment on this by e-mail, though I won’t say from whom.
You can speak for yourselves today, but I think there’s a lot of interest in this.
I was about to offer to host a donor’s conference to see if we could get the language on this right.
But it may be that Vincent’s procedural steps will take care of that, and I’m happy to turn this back over to the staff.
However, I think a key issue is whether the Committee wants to benchmark the assessment of the economy.
I very much do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think we have to be a little careful here because there is a prerequisite to this discussion that we don’t talk about, namely how much can we rationally October 28, 200389 of 126expect monetary policy to do.
If we believe that monetary policy has the capability of affecting the economy incrementally in all sorts of ways
<START>—to create whatever level of unemployment, GDP growth, and inflation we choose<END>
—and we can implement policies that will accomplish such objectives, then I can see announcing very explicit target levels.
My problem with that type of policy commitment is that it promises far more than monetary policy has the capacity to deliver.
We have to be very careful about what we set up as our goals;
we need to make sure that they are reachable goals.
<START>If we say, for example, that our goal is to get the unemployment rate down to 4.6 percent with a growth rate in GDP that would close the output gap by X percent or something like that, that’s all well and good.<END>
But do we actually have the capacity to accomplish that?
My answer is that we most certainly do not.
Now, if indeed the e-mails you’re getting come from members who believe that we can, that’s an important issue.
We have to stay within the bounds of what we believe this Committee can do, and I just want to make sure that that is explicitly recognized before we go further.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
May I respond to that?
I think the issue is not whether we get to full employment in some reasonable period but how our policy is structured given the way we see output relative to some objective.
<START>I see the issue as how best to say that we are trying to work in a direction of expansion or contraction, whichever the case may be, but not in any sense promising that we would achieve a goal.<END>
<START>And I’d be perfectly symmetric with inflation.<END>
<START>I would say that we see inflation above the level we consider desirable or below it, and therefore our policy is X. So I don’t think this approach contains a promise that we will get to a goal.<END>
But I believe we can illuminate our actions by specifying the direction toward which we are working and how we are trying to influence the economy.
That is frankly what I do in making decisions October 28, 200390 of 126when I come to our meetings.
If that’s what I do
—and I think that’s what most of you do
—then it seems to me that we ought to be able to talk about it in those terms.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Indeed, I think everyone does that because we all have our own objectives and hence when we vote we make policy decisions based on those objectives.
Implicitly we all do that, or else we would not be able to come to a conclusion.
What I’m arguing against is the capacity of the members of this Committee to have a similar view on all of the goals.
We really can’t achieve that sort of unanimity
—a majority determines it
—because each individual member has to be free to make a final judgment on the basis of whatever conceptual framework he or she has with respect to the economy.
<START>If we all had the same conceptual framework, I will acknowledge that the proposition you are arguing would enhance our transparency.<END>
<START>But frankly, knowing all the members of this Committee, I think we’d have trouble getting a philosophical agreement among all nineteen people on how the economy works to the degree that is required to formulate monetary policy.<END>
I’d say that would be very difficult.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
First, I want to start with a quote, go on to make some points, and then answer Vincent’s question.
Vincent opened with a quote from William of Orange, and I’ll start with one from Winston Churchill, who said that in matters of communication “victory is never final, and defeat is never fatal.” So I want to encourage us to keep going because whatever happens we will not get to the end point.
<START>Second, I come from a background in consulting, and one of the first things I learned in consulting was to define the nature of the problem.<END>
That leads me to discuss a little survey that I found.
The question was, Does the Fed disclose enough information about interest rate policy?
Thirty-four percent of the respondents said that they felt well informed;
another 34 percent October 28, 200391 of 126answered “yes, there was enough information but it was a little too confusing”;
27 percent said the Fed is “too secretive”;
and a surprising 5 percent said that the Fed provided too much information.
I don’t suggest that this survey was scientific and, obviously, if it didn’t support my point of view I wouldn’t have brought it up!
[Laughter] But the reason I raised it is that I think we have to be very careful here.
<START>Although we’ve suffered criticism, boos as well as cheers, I’m not so sure that we need a dramatic change in our communications.<END>
<START>We need a change for sure, but I’m not convinced that we need a dramatic change that may again throw the markets into uncertainty about what we’re trying to do.<END>
<START>I would caution us, as we go through this exercise, to recognize that our communication policy is not perfect by any stretch of imagination but it’s not completely broken.<END>
So I would encourage us to think about incremental changes, if you will.
That said, let me get to the answer to Vincent’s first question regarding a clear preference as to the basic structure of our statement.
On this I pick up from where Tony Santomero was in the early part of the meeting.
I believe it would be very helpful in the forward-looking part of our statement for us to separate the two issues that are now combined.
One part would literally be an indication of how we think the economy is likely to evolve or change
<START>—whether we think growth is picking up or slowing down and whether inflation is picking up or slowing down.<END>
That would involve just a factual statement, if you will.
The second part would give some sort of value judgment or welfare assessment, whatever the term may be.
I think whoever said that the nine-box matrix in the Bluebook seems to combine those two concepts was right.
In my view our communication needs to disentangle them.
One of the weaknesses in the earlier risk assessment
—it had several weaknesses that we discovered over time
—was that too many things were entangled into a relatively small number of words.
So in terms of my preference as to the October 28, 200392 of 126structure, I’d like a structure that clearly breaks out our sense of the outlook as a factual statement versus the value judgment relating to our goals.
A second preference I have is to avoid language that is too precise in terms of specifying a variety of goals or targets.
<START>We don’t have collectively a well-stated goal on unemployment, for example.<END>
I’m not sure we all share the same point of view regarding potential.
<START>We don’t necessarily have the same point of view about the desirable level of inflation.<END>
We all think it should be low, obviously
—probably in a range between 1 and 2 percent on certain measures
—but we don’t have a target that is well defined by the Committee.
So I’d be quite cautious about going too far down the path toward language that implies that we have specific targets or that forces us to continue to answer questions about what exactly our goals are or what we deem acceptable.
I think we have to maintain some vagueness in that regard.
The third rule I’d have in my preferences as to the structure is that it be stress-tested, perhaps using some of the nine boxes in the matrix approach that Vincent suggested in his memo.
<START>One of the problems with the earlier language was that, although we did attempt to stress-test it, we didn’t foresee a period with a large output gap, inflation falling, and growth rising dramatically above potential.<END>
So the tradeoffs that were built into the old balance of risks, though they lasted for about three years, last into the most recent period.
didn’t [Laughter] It would inappropriate to do such a thing.
I won’t blame the previous director of Monetary Affairs for this!
But let the record show that he’s nodding his head, supporting my comments in one way or the other!
In any event, I do think that we need to take some more time and do some stress testing.
That said, for reasons the Chairman alluded to, I must say that I was drawn to Vincent’s language in his memo of October 22 as an approach that perhaps could work.
The last thing I’d October 28, 200393 of 126say about my preferences, having gone through this three-year period or so with the statement structured the way it is now, is that if we do make another change, we need to recognize that it probably won’t be the last change.
So I think we really should be aiming at enough stress testing
—and maybe it’s implied in the stress testing
—to allow us to stay with the new language for longer than a three-year period.
<START>We may never succeed in doing that, but the goal of stress testing is to think of as many potential permutations as possible.<END>
I thought Vincent’s nine boxes did that to a large degree.
So that’s my answer to the first question in terms of preferences.
I have these two or three preferences, recognizing as I said that we’re not in a horrifically bad position, though obviously we do need to continue to move forward on communication issues.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Mr. Chairman, I don’t have a quote, but I am reminded of a life experience, which was the first time I ate a raw oyster.
Somebody forgot to tell me to let it slide down.
<START>Instead, I began to chew on the darn thing, and the more you chew on an oyster the tougher it gets to swallow.<END>
I might have been closer to being ready to make some judgments on communication issues at our dinner meeting last month than I am now.
<START>If anything, it has become clearer to me that this subject is very complicated.<END>
There are more options.
Ned’s ideas are fascinating but raise some new questions.
The discussion today raises still more.
So I’m not close to being ready this afternoon to start choosing.
I may be in the minority in this view, but despite the fact that we’ve already talked about this issue and some ideas are on the table, I’m not sure each of us has really had a chance to put our best ideas on the table.
I don’t think we can do that in a one-hour dinner meeting, and I don’t think we can do that in a one-hour session at an FOMC meeting.
So if we can get by until the October 28, 200394 of 126January meeting, I have a rather strong preference for asking a small group of either principals or senior staff to get everybody’s best ideas and sort through the options to a point where we can effectively work with them.
That would give us some time to think this out more carefully, and we could devote a whole afternoon to discuss it thoroughly at our January meeting and try to get it as right as we possibly can.
I think we’d be best served if we took that kind of time and care to try to sort some of this out.
It has gotten very complicated.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I more or less share the view that President Guynn expressed.
One of the things I did in preparation for this discussion was to go back to the press release that we used in January 2000.
After some considerable thought, the Committee
—rightly or wrongly
—put that wording together.
It worked very well as far as I’m concerned.
Then some special circumstances came up, and we made changes in that wording.
They served their purpose but now we have some fallout from that.
We ought to go back to the earlier language as a starting point
—not to the language we’re now using, which was put together ad hoc piece-by-piece, but back to the base.
Let’s think it through and see what we need to modify in that language.
If it makes sense, I’d keep the structure as close to that earlier version as possible and then move forward.
I would not try to figure out wording today or choose now among several options.
I don’t feel comfortable with any of them.
I’d feel reasonably comfortable with what we had before with some changes to reflect that we’re in a more stable price environment.
So I agree with Jack.
Maybe circumstances are changing too quickly, and we can’t wait until January.
<START>But we ought to wait at least until December, think this through more carefully, and come up with some options or narrow our options at that point.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
October 28, 200395 of 126MR. PARRY.
At the last meeting I came away with the impression that what we seemed to agree on was that the directive wording and the risk assessment we voted on should be what we communicated to the public.
It was important to many of us
—maybe to all of us
—that the communication directly reflect our vote.
<START>Is it naive, Vincent, to think that we could focus on the directive wording and the risk assessment, which we didn’t seem to have too much trouble agreeing to and voting on today, and find a way for that language to be what we release?<END>
How long did it take us to agree on that wording today
—two nanoseconds?
MR.
REINHART.
Although what you agreed on formally were instructions to the drafters of the statement.
I think in the proposal
— MR. PARRY.
What we agreed on is what is going to appear in the minutes.
MR.
REINHART.
What Normand read was from the page in the Bluebook.
MR.
PARRY.
Yes.
MR REINHART.
That isn’t identical to what is in today’s press release for the following reason
— MR. PARRY.
Oh, I know that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
This is a minor issue because we can readily do what Bob is saying in that context.
MR.
REINHART.
The proposal was that, when you decide on a risk assessment, what you vote on would be what appears in the directive.
I think everyone agreed to that.
The problem for this meeting operationally was that, if you decided to adopt language that differs from what you used at the last meeting, we would not have known what the alternative would be.
MR.
PARRY.
Okay.
Isn’t the goal to get the language in the vote and the press release the same?
Why should that be so difficult?
Based on what I’ve read in the last couple of weeks, October 28, 200396 of 126it’s extremely difficult.
I don’t understand why.
Maybe we need an English teacher or grammarian.
MR.
STERN.
No maybe about that!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The trouble is that, when you run into a problem, you tend to add adjectives and adverbs to any statement.
MR.
PARRY.
Yes, I noticed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
And it becomes the oyster that Jack’s been chewing on!
[Laughter] President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
I agree with Jack that we need to do some hard background work and have an extended session in January to review where we want to go on this.
One dimension of this on the table is the issue that Ned raised at the outset having to do with objectives and whether we can usefully sharpen that language.
I think another very important dimension that we need to address is the extent to which we want to foreshadow or hint about the future policy direction.
My own view is that whenever we regard the risks as unbalanced
—I’ll say seriously unbalanced just to make my point clear
—we should move the funds rate right away.
We should move it at the meeting when we recognize or make an assessment that the risks are seriously unbalanced.
<START>So my preference would be that we use the balanced risk assessment as the explanation for why the adjustment did not take place at the current meeting and that we never have an unbalanced risk assessment going forward<END>
—or at least not seriously unbalanced.
If the risks were that unbalanced, my position is that we already would have adjusted policy.
At any rate, I consider this an important dimension that we need to focus on.
I don’t think we can come up with the appropriate language around the table today in a situation like this but that’s another aspect of our communication policy that we must spend time on.
October 28, 200397 of 126MR. FERGUSON.
May I ask President Poole a question?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Sure.
MR.
FERGUSON.
I agree with you, but do you not foresee a period where the risks could be unbalanced but not so unbalanced that the Committee felt it had to move immediately?
In such a situation the tilt is not a hint about policy, but a sense
—and this is what I think we’ve been doing for two years
—that the risks are weighted in a certain direction though we’re not so strong in our conviction that we feel we need to move policy.
MR.
POOLE.
Obviously there’s a whole continuum here.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Right.
MR.
POOLE.
I understand that, of course.
<START>My concern is that making a statement that the risks are unbalanced and yet not wanting that to be interpreted as a hint about the probable direction of policy is a very difficult language act to pull off.<END>
I think the market routinely views the unbalanced risk assessment as a hint about or at least some probability regarding the future direction of policy.
MR.
FERGUSON.
I think that’s true.
MR.
POOLE.
<START>I’m uncomfortable doing that because my view is that the policy adjustments are primarily driven by surprises or by the new information that we can’t predict.<END>
That’s why I believe that providing these hints causes problems more than it helps.
I’m just saying that that’s something we need to discuss.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Right.
MR.
POOLE.
We need to reach some agreement on that.
I’m not trying to say that we can come to an agreement here today.
But I think some people want to provide that hint about October 28, 200398 of 126the likely direction of policy.
I did when I first came here.
But I’ve changed my mind in living through issuing these statements as to whether or not those hints are really constructive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bernanke.
MR.
BERNANKE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’m happy to wait until January if that’s what people want to do.
I would like to express a mild preference
—more than a mild preference
—for Governor Gramlich’s formulation.
I think it’s important to have benchmarks.
Our current statement and both of the suggested statements have benchmarks in the terms “sustainable growth,” “unwelcome,” “desirably lower,” or “desirably higher.” So that’s not the question;
all of the versions have benchmarks.
I like Governor Gramlich’s formulation better because his benchmark for output is not whether it is growing above or below the growth rate of potential but that it has a trajectory that leads eventually toward full employment.
That is a different concept, but that’s really what we should be shooting for.
I think that’s a better way of thinking about our objective.
I understand Governor Ferguson’s comment about breaking the forecast and the evaluation into two parts.
But in fact the statement suggested by Vincent does not do that because the forecast for output includes a reference to sustainable growth.
<START>There is explicitly a benchmark for growth, symmetrically, but there should be a benchmark for inflation in that same paragraph.<END>
To make matters more complicated, I might note that I just came from the Bank of England, and they don’t issue any statement at all immediately after their policy meeting.
They’re very happy releasing the minutes a couple of weeks after the meeting because they think that document conveys all the subtleties of their discussion much better than a statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Actually, that option should be on the table.
Where I have a problem with what you’re saying is this.
The notion that disinflation is unwelcome at this October 28, 200399 of 126juncture is a value judgment all of us share.
As I indicated to Ned, if we all agree that the desirable level of unemployment is X, then that’s in the same category.
If we can stipulate that we agree on the desirable level for every one of the goals, what you’re suggesting can work.
I’m basically saying that we’re not going to achieve that.
And to try to do it when it’s patently unattainable I think will waste a lot of the Committee’s time.
It’s not that in principle it’s bad.
I just think it’s utterly unachievable.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I certainly agree that we need to clarify the language, and we’re not going to get it done today.
We could very well make it until next January, though I think we would need to work on it in December as well and not leave it all for January.
I started by asking what our goal was, and I think I took off from where President Poole was in a sense but came to the opposite conclusion.
I thought our goal was to help people better anticipate where interest rates might go.
By giving them a little information as to what we were worried about, we might help them anticipate our actions a little better.
<START>I don’t think all of our actions are keyed to new information, new shocks.<END>
Sometimes we’re at positions where we think we’re more likely to do one thing than another because of how we see the economy developing, and it’s helpful to the markets to tell them that.
So this is about changes in interest rates and the likely movement of interest rates.
Also, consistent with what President Hoenig was saying, I think that was what the subcommittee was trying to do
—as ill-served as it might have been by the then director of Monetary Affairs.
We were trying to look at changes in the output gaps and in the inflation gaps that would then lead to changes in interest rates.
That leads me to the Reinhart language, which to me is in that same spirit.
I agree it doesn’t have benchmarks in it.
That to me is a separable issue.
In my view we don’t need to tell people what our benchmarks October 28, 2003100 of 126are to help them see where interest rates might go in the future.
We might want to tell them our benchmarks, but I think that’s a separate debate.
When I looked at Ned’s version, I did try to do some stress testing on it.
Perhaps I misread it, but it talks about the probability that economic growth will proceed over the next few quarters at a rate consistent with the attainment of maximum sustainable employment.
Then it says that “over the same period” the probability that inflation will be undesirably high is below, equal to, or above the probability that it will be undesirably low.
That implies that the time reference for inflation is the next few quarters and to me that was much too short a time frame.
I asked myself if I answered “equal” to both of those parts
<START>—that I thought we would be at maximum employment in a few quarters, and inflation would be equal to or above a desirable level<END>
—what would I be doing with interest rates in that situation?
I think I would be raising interest rates if I believed we would be at 5 percent unemployment some time next year
—or at least I would be preparing the markets for that possibility.
Now, in a private conversation with Governor Gramlich he informed me that I wasn’t reading his words right.
But the only time reference in his formulation is “over the next few quarters.” If we mean over the next few years, I think we need to say that;
otherwise it implies that monetary policy will not be stabilizing but will promote overshooting.
I just think the benchmark issue is a separate issue.
We don’t need to do really benchmarks to accomplish what we set out to accomplish a few years ago.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, the first thing I would say is, Jack, when you eat an oyster you really ought to chew it.
That’s what brings the flavor out.
[Laughter] When I think about communication, to me what makes a communication good is that it’s direct, clear, and October 28, 2003101 of 126understandable.
On that score, Ned’s suggested wording has a lot to offer.
It’s direct, and of the alternatives that we’re considering today, I think it is in some sense the clearest and most understandable.
It also has an accountability dimension to it, and I like that.
I find the benchmark attractive.
The one issue, Ned
—and we talked about this a little before
—is that the use of employment as a benchmark concept is something I have to think about.
I would have to get more comfortable with that.
<START>I’ve spent a lot of time over my career arguing for a price stability mandate.<END>
I know I’m pushing my luck here, but in that regard if we had a more explicit target
<START>—or let me say a firmer inflation anchor<END>
—I could be more comfortable with something like Ned’s proposed language.
I think it could work.
That’s about where I am on the alternatives we have before us.
I agree with Jack and Tom that we need to think this through carefully.
We need to take whatever time is necessary.
Certainly we can wait until January;
I think the language we have now will be satisfactory until then.
The other point I would add is that, once we make a decision, the decision itself may warrant a more prominent announcement than we’ve typically made when we’ve made changes in the past.
We may want to release an extended press statement that lays out the reasoning as to why, for the foreseeable future, we are going to use this new language.
If we are a little more communicative on that score than usual, I think that would help.
That’s where I am.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
In preparation for this discussion I reread the verbatim transcript of our dinner meeting last month.
It was very interesting and informative.
I realized how much I miss sometimes when I’m thinking about what I want to say as opposed to what other people are saying.
I was one of the people who at that time did not want to change much in our statement October 28, 2003102 of 126and for the near term I’m still in that camp.
But I’ve come around a lot, to somewhere near where President Poole is, and I certainly agree with Presidents Guynn and Hoenig that we need to give this a lot more thought.
We definitely have to say what we did and why we it.
did And in saying why we took whatever action we did, we ought to give some sense of the things that concern us about the current outlook.
I really question
—I’m sorry, Don
—the assumption that it helps the markets at all for us to go further than that and talk about the risks of various developments in the future.
I’m not sure it helps them.
I think it just gives them more to chew on in terms of what we said, why we said it, and who said what, and they think about that rather than doing their job in the market.
They shouldn’t be spending as much time second-guessing us as they are.
They should be out there doing whatever it is markets do.
[Laughter] SPEAKER(?).
But we’re the 800-pound gorilla in the market.
MS.
MINEHAN.
<START>Well, I know we’re the 800-pound gorilla, but I think we should avoid a commitment about the future.<END>
We should clearly avoid any sense
—and somehow try to correct the belief
—that we sit around this table trying to figure out what the markets are likely to do and what we’re going to say to make them do something different.
The markets are going to do what they’re going to do.
We have to make our policy the way we call the cards.
<START>We may be right, or we may be wrong;<END>
but we should not be making policy
—or even talking about policy
—that’s aimed at changing how the markets operate.
They have to operate a bit independently of us, I think.
So in the short term I think we did the right thing today.
<START>Between now and January we probably will be coming to an appreciation of the risks being more balanced.<END>
That will change the language.
That will help us get out of the “considerable period” terminology.
In January
—my personal preference is to take a real step back and think long and hard about what the risk statement does for us.
If we’re convinced that it does something good, then we have any number October 28, 2003103 of 126of formulations of language to go with.
<START>If we’re not convinced, then maybe we can find a way to tell the markets that they will find out what we did and why, but we’re going to stop speculating on the risks.<END>
I don’t care if we use a task force in the interim.
That’s fine by me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
Well, working backward, I also would be in favor of taking our time on this because I do think it’s important.
I don’t think we have any reason to rush.
<START>I found the Gramlich memo appealing but for a reason that I haven’t heard stated, and that is that maximum sustainable employment and low inflation are our public policy mandate.<END>
Those of us who have been through the confirmation process were reminded of that in our confirmation hearings.
I didn’t look at the transcripts of the recent hearings;
but I suspect that, if Senator Sarbanes or some others were there, the nominees may well have been reminded of that dual mandate.
I don’t see those objectives as requiring a benchmark of any more numeric specificity than what we now have.
I was involved in an exercise about a year ago with President Broaddus and others in which we reviewed our strategic direction.
When we talked about the monetary policy role, we came back to that congressional mandate as the starting point.
So from that perspective, Governor Gramlich’s wording appeals to me.
Also, I suspect that the Federal Reserve Act will not change significantly over the next few years, so it seems to me that, if we have that as the starting point, it’s also likely that we could stay with such a format.
I’m also an incrementalist, and I think we should not make a lot of changes.
That’s a component of the Gramlich memo that I find particularly appealing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
But he goes far beyond what you just said.
MR.
OLSON.
Does he?
October 28, 2003104 of 126CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
He has specific numbers.
We just voted on instructions to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in which we used exactly the kind of language you’re talking about.
In fact that happens to be an issue on which we all agree.
So we can use that sort of language.
But I think Ned is trying to get something more specific than that.
<START>He’s trying to put in hard numbers or get something more conclusive than a vague notion of what is maximum sustainable growth.<END>
If we all agreed on what that number was, then we could do it.
But that’s not going to happen.
MR.
OLSON.
I guess I didn’t read it that way.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Ned, am I misinterpreting what you said?
MR.
GRAMLICH.
I think so.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>Well, then tell me what I’ve said wrong.<END>
MR.
GRAMLICH.
<START>I don’t see anything in here that commits us to any specific goal on either the inflation side or the unemployment side.<END>
This actually replaces the statement that growth has to proceed at a stable rate.
All it says is that growth is proceeding at a rate that in our view is consistent with the eventual
—and maybe we ought to put in the word “eventual”
—attainment of maximum sustainable employment.
I don’t think we have to say what that level of employment is, and I don’t think we have to give an inflation target.
We could, as Al suggested.
But the way the statement is written I don’t think we have to.
I intentionally wrote it in a way that we could avoid giving specific numerical targets.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Well, the question is whether in fact in the real world that is capable of being achieved.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Yes, that’s an issue.
Believe me, I understand that.
October 28, 2003105 of 126CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Okay, I withdraw my negative comment.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
I’ll make a different negative comment then, Mr. Chairman.
I am concerned about having a maximum sustainable employment objective.
I don’t really mean that it’s not an objective
—obviously we all agree that it’s in the statute
—but I would not put it in the statement.
<START>I find it difficult to envision a circumstance in which we would ever want to say publicly that economic growth will proceed over the next few quarters at a rate above that consistent with the attainment of maximum sustainable employment if the latter is falling short of our objective.<END>
I don’t think we’re ever going to want to say we’re against more employment.
It puts us in a very awkward position, quite frankly.
I think the term “growth” has served us well over many years, and I personally like the term “growth” better here.
<START>Also, I used to work in the Labor Department, so I’m very sensitive to the employment and unemployment part of our mandate.<END>
Let me turn to the process side, which is the subject I really wanted to make most of my comments on.
I think we’ve had some very good suggestions today.
As I view this going forward, it is worth looking carefully to see if we can craft language that we’re comfortable with that would be a formulaic approach, which is essentially what we have now.
I’d prefer a formula where there are a certain number of options and we pick one at each meeting.
I think we want to change the language, although it’s going to be difficult to do given the differences of opinion.
<START>But it would make our decision on the language a lot easier at each meeting if we could find a formulaic approach.<END>
I think it’s worth the effort, and I like the idea of having a task force that will come back to us with some options or recommendations.
<START>I also agree that the other option October 28, 2003106 of 126that we discussed before and rejected, namely the earlier release of the minutes, is another approach that we should consider.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
That would solve a lot of problems.
MR.
MOSKOW.
That’s right;
and we could just drop this language completely.
I think it’s worth seeing what the logistics of an early release of the minutes really are.
We talked about that possibility, and I know it would put a lot of pressure on the Board staff to draft the document and on all of us to review it.
But I think it’s worth going through a timeline in detail to see what would be involved, and we can determine if we are willing to commit to getting the minutes out in two weeks or three weeks or whatever the appropriate interval would happen to be.
I don’t think we can do what we need to do on these communication issues around this table with nineteen people.
<START>In my view, we ought to have a separate group work on it and come back with recommendations.<END>
I think that group has to get input from everyone on the Committee so that each of us has a chance to convey our views.
We’re going to have to have probably several discussions as a Committee once that group reports to us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The obvious problem is that if we release the minutes earlier we’ll find that the whole Committee is going to want to get involved in editing them.
Theoretically, in my judgment, earlier publication of the minutes is the ideal solution to our communication dilemma if we could find a way to ensure that we can produce a document that is comparable in terms of quality to what we do now.
I don’t know what types of comments Vincent gets on the draft minutes.
But looking at the changes, there are very few.
If that indeed is the kind of document we would get two weeks after the meeting, we could consider it the major vehicle for communication.
I think the value of that is overwhelming compared with our October 28, 2003107 of 126mincing the language the way we’re trying to mince it in our press release.
Maybe we ought to think of a way to do that.
MR.
PARRY.
We have to address the issue of whether we would get the same kind of product as we do now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Yes, that’s correct.
That’s the issue.
Nevertheless, the minutes are not bad now.
I think they do describe conceptually what we are doing.
MR.
REINHART.
Mr. Chairman, in answer to President Moskow’s question, I would make one observation.
The Bank of England is the model for this approach, and they get their minutes out in two weeks.
They also have the advantage that everybody in the policy group is in the same building, so they sit down and devote a half-day to editing the minutes line by line.
The original assumption with regard to the January discussion on communications was that we’d have this issue of the statement behind us by then.
Our intention was to talk in January about the early release of the minutes and an expanded use of the central tendency forecast.
The forecast would have a big role in the process because the forecast appears in the minutes and if the minutes are out earlier, the forecast will be, too.
The staff is preparing two documents related to that.
Right now the communication agenda is rather crowded, and any guidance as to sequencing would be helpful.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If we could find a way to group the members into a constant alignment of similarly minded people, each group could assign one person as a representative to the editing committee.
Then we could have a small group of people sitting around editing.
I wouldn’t suggest that that’s about to happen.
MR.
REINHART.
I think your next Secretary, Mr. Chairman, will have a challenge.
[Laughter] October 28, 2003108 of 126MR. POOLE.
Would the proposal be not to have any statement after a meeting even if we change policy?
Would we let everything ride until we publish the minutes?
If we’re going to have a statement anyway, we’re still going to have a struggle with the wording of a statement.
MR.
MOSKOW.
I would drop the balance of risk part and have the statement be only this first paragraph regarding what we’ve done.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We’d stipulate what action we took.
MR.
POOLE.
Well, that’s easy, if there’s no explanation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
There’s going to be an explanation, two or three sentences.
MR.
MOSKOW.
There will be an explanation but not a balance of risks statement.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Yes, we’ll have just the first paragraph of the press release but not the second paragraph.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Yes.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
By the way, as author of the eloquent version of the second paragraph, I would be perfectly happy to have that all supplanted by the minutes if there is a way to do it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Well, we really ought to explore that.
MR.
REINHART.
We are preparing a document on the early release of the minutes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Why don’t you try to do the minutes earlier for this particular meeting?
[Laughter] This is the easiest meeting for which you’ll be able to do minutes.
It will give you the baseline of how close you can get to an actual implementation of the early release option.
MR.
POOLE.
Is this the stress test?
[Laughter] MR. REINHART.
Of whom?
October 28, 2003109 of 126MS. MINEHAN.
Count the years to retirement, Vincent!
MR.
MCTEER.
The minutes could say, “Following lunch, a vigorous discussion ensued with respect to communications.” [Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We’re running out of allocated time at this particular moment.
May I suggest, in order to move this process forward, that in conjunction with the Secretariat, we will appoint a committee of Governors and Presidents
—an estimable group if they wish to join
—and see whether or not we can at least narrow this down.
We actually narrowed it down some today.
<START>It appeared to me that, if we could find a way to solve the problem of drafting and editing the minutes more quickly, that solution of releasing the minutes earlier would carry the day in this Committee.<END>
Am I correct in that?
SEVERAL.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
But there are problems in doing that.
Maybe we can learn some things from the British experience and find a mechanism that will enable us to succeed in accomplishing that.
One possibility
—I'm just throwing ideas out in the air
—is that at the late January meeting, when we vote on a number of things, we could vote on an editing committee.
In other words, we could appoint a subgroup of this Committee that for the coming year basically would be charged with the drafting requirements of the minutes.
The interesting point about that is that to make it work we cannot go back to the full FOMC for a decision on the minutes because if that happens then it becomes a wholly indeterminate process.
I’m just throwing out that possibility.
<START>There has to be some constraint on the exercise of democracy in this group if we’re going to achieve this goal.<END>
The question is what constraints we are willing to impose on ourselves.
Currently we all have the opportunity for a complete input.
<START>It is true statutorily that only twelve of us can vote, but that has scarcely been evident in the discussions October 28, 2003110 of 126within this Committee.<END>
If somebody has a good idea even if he or she does not have a vote, that idea may weigh more heavily in the final deliberations than the comments of someone who is a voting member.
So I think we’ve got to do something along the lines I suggested.
May I have the Committee’s acceptance of a notion to set up a subcommittee or working group that will move forward on this subject from where we are?
Perhaps when there is something to report Vincent could send out a note.
<START>And the conclusion of that note may well be that we ought to have a phone conference.<END>
Incidentally, we now have a videoconferencing system.
It worked very well at the Dallas meeting.
Why don’t we do videoconferencing FOMC calls?
Is there a reason at the moment why we wouldn’t?
MR.
REINHART.
I don’t know the answer to that, Mr. Chairman.
I suspect it’s related to the fact that the tape recording equipment is in this room.
But that is something that we can address.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I venture to say that there’s a solution to that.
We are approaching the bewitching hour, and to make sure that Michelle does not tell a falsehood about when our meeting ended, we’re going to have to bring this session to a close.
Regrettably, I have on my list five people who wanted to speak and were not able to do so.
But if there is a next meeting on this, the five of you will get priority even if you’ve forgotten what you wanted to say!
I’ll give the list to the Secretary.
With that, the meeting is adjourned.
END OF MEETING October 28, 2003111 of 126
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 100
