Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 16-17, 1984A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Monday, July 16, 1984, at 3:00 p.m., and continuingon Tuesday, July 17, 1984, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.MrsMr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker,Solomon,BoehneBoykinCorriganGramleyHornMartinParteeRiceSegerWallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Kohn, Lang,Prell, Stern, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account7/16-17/84Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill,l/ Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Madigan 2/ and Rosine,2/ Economists, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. T. Davis, Keran, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofKansas City, San Francisco, Chicago, and Atlanta,respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus, Burger, Fieleke, and Meek, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, Boston,and New York, respectivelyMs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply provides a list of the people who were present at the meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department, FederalReserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJuly 16-17, 1984July 16--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether you've had a chanceto meet all these people yet, Ms. Seger. We can make ourintroductions afterwards, but we welcome you to the meeting.We don't have a coffee break this afternoon, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a straightforward statement about a meeting and the lack of a coffee break. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 3.
MR. BERNARD. There is coffee out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without any contentious or disagreement.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Don't tell them that. We will proceed.We need the minutes approved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The first sentence simply states not to inform someone about something, while the second sentence expresses the need to proceed and have the minutes approved.


Passage number 5.
MR. MARTIN. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "So moved" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is a common phrase used in meetings to show agreement or support for a motion or proposal.


Passage number 6.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 7.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they are approved. Wewill turn to Mr. Kichline.MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, TRUMAN, and PRELL. [Statements--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the approval is done without objection and then proceeds to mention the individuals present.


Passage number 8.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a sense that the inflationforecasts from people sitting around this table are considerablypessimistic relative to what has happened recently.Let me ask a question about this debt number. I don't knowhow you figure all this; I'm sure you don't have any very precise wayof allowing for the mergers. Suppose you did this differently--orthis may be what you did--and included the normal level of stockfinancing in the numbers, whatever it is. What would these ratioslook like relative to [the normal] experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 9.
MR. PRELL. Ratios. Are you referring to the bottom panels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply mentions ratios and asks for clarification regarding the bottom panels.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm looking at the bottom panel butthat doesn't give me the answer. Suppose this measure that we usewere not net domestic credit or whatever we call it but net domesticfund raising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are examining a specific panel or measurement, and then proposing a hypothetical scenario in which a different measure is used. There is no conflicting opinion or argument presented.


Passage number 11.
MR. PRELL. That is, of course, what I plotted in the bottomleft panel. That is both debt and equity. So that is the total fundsraised or the total external financing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Prell is explaining what he plotted in the bottom left panel, specifically the total funds raised or total external financing which includes both debt and equity. There is no contention or disagreement presented in this statement.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But would these lines go below zero.Shouldn't the red line have gone all the way to the bottom in somesense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is asking a question and expressing a viewpoint, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement present. The speaker is simply questioning whether the lines in question should extend all the way to the bottom or below zero.


Passage number 13.
MR. KICHLINE. Are you looking at the first chart in Mike'spresentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 14.
MR. PRELL. Are you referring to the nonfinancialcorporations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question and does not indicate any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 15.
7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't make any difference what chartI'm referring to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states that it does not matter what chart is being referred to.


Passage number 16.
MR. PARTEE. I think he has a point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker acknowledges that the person they are referring to has a valid perspective or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
MR. PRELL. The way we got the adjustment, in essence, was tomake an estimate on the basis of all that we know about the equityflows and all the merger activities. And we came up with a net equityabsorption number. There was a net decline in equities of somethinglike $60 or $65 billion in each of the first two quarters. We thenwould hypothesize that, in the conditions that prevailed, that wouldbe the relevant number. We know that new equity issuance is somethingslightly positive--say, on the order of $10 billion. So, the [grossretirement] is on the order of $70 or $75 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there was a net decline in equities of around $60 or $65 billion in each of the first two quarters. However, they also mention that new equity issuance is slightly positive, on the order of $10 billion. This discrepancy causes contention or disagreement within the passage.


Passage number 18.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what you subtracted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express disagreement or contention. It is simply acknowledging the action of subtracting.


Passage number 19.
MR. PRELL. That's right--a number of that magnitude. Itwould be a shade over a percentage point of the total debt flow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the magnitude of a number.


Passage number 20.
MR. BOEHNE. How do you read the chart at the bottom onnonfinancial corporations when you have equity in the negative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is asking for clarification or interpretation of a chart, but does not express disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 21.
MR. PRELL. Well, that shows that net equity liquidation isabout $60 to $65 billion by our estimates. Then the borrowing is thetotal height of the red part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 22.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The borrowing must be the total amount ofthe red part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that the borrowing must be the total amount of the red part.


Passage number 23.
MR. PRELL. That's right. This [chart] is defective. I'msorry. The total funds raised is the height and the borrowing reallyshould be the entire length of that bar. That is not properlyplotted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Prell, acknowledges that there is an error in the chart and expresses an apology for it. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 24.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, all I asked was: If you took both ofthose together and had some base--I don't know if you used itcorrectly--what would the percentage increase there be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 25.
MR. PRELL. If you put them both together, it's 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "If you put them both together, it's 12 percent" is a straightforward mathematical calculation that doesn't involve any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 26.
The debt was--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 12 percent if you just apply it to abase of 10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply provides a statement about the debt and its percentage.


Passage number 27.
MR. PRELL. If there had not been any mergers, the debtpresumably would have grown by 12 percent. I guess the right answerto your question is that the number would not be far different from 13percent to the extent that equities are not a gigantic sum of thetotal liabilities in the economy. They are a significant part but thedebt is much larger, so that absent the mergers you would have afigure approaching 13 percent, I think. I stand open to corrections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Prell, is simply providing an explanation and stating that he is open to corrections if necessary.


Passage number 28.
I'm having a hard time--MR. CORRIGAN. Not absent the mergers per se. It's absentthe stock [unintelligible] regardless of whether they came frommergers or something else. Then the number would have been 13percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or observation about the situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 29.
7/16-17/84MR. GRAMLEY. If you put the market value of equities intoit, you can't do that. You have to figure out what base to put inthere; the amount of the base that's included is the critical issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is stating that "if you put the market value of equities into it, you can't do that," suggesting disagreement with the idea of including the market value of equities. Additionally, he argues that "the amount of the base that's included is the critical issue," implying a disagreement about determining the appropriate base to include.


Passage number 30.
MR. PRELL. That's the problem. That's one of the reasons wehave not created a total financial aggregate. It's an arbitraryassumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a problem that has not been solved and provides a reason for why it has not been solved.


Passage number 31.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you also have a distortion when you doit this way if in fact there is a lot of retiring of equity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about a potential distortion when retiring equity, but there is no expression of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 32.
MR. PRELL. Well, that's what we've had this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact about something that has occurred over the course of the year.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 33.
MR. BOEHNE. I have a question on the chart that has the wageincreases, which is about in the middle of the package. I keepreading these figures in the Greenbook that show wage increases around4 percent or a little under or a little above. Yet everywhere I go inmy District, except for the really hard-pressed manufacturing areas, 6percent is the most common number. There are very few under that andmost are over that; yet the national figures keep showing theserelatively low rates. My District could be different or there couldbe some wide discrepancies among industries. Do you have any sense ofhow firm these numbers are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, is expressing his disagreement with the national figures on wage increases. He mentions that in his district, the common wage increase is around 6 percent, which is higher than the figures shown in the national data. He questions the accuracy and reliability of the national numbers, suggesting that there might be discrepancies among industries or regional differences.


Passage number 34.
MR. ZEISEL. Well, it's hard in any absolute sense toevaluate them. They have shown a reasonable pattern. There is noquestion that they have been remarkably optimistic in measuring therate of [increase] and they have been somewhat lower than theemployment cost index, which is another measure of wages and otherchanges for a broader group including supervisors and white collarworkers. Those data have been showing something closer to the 6percent rate. It's conceivable that this has a somewhat downward biasbecause it includes just production workers. Essentially, other thanthat, I don't have any basis for questioning them except that theylook awfully good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different measures of wages and acknowledging that they have been generally positive, without expressing any disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 35.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, my personnel department keeps coming backwith these surveys and my research staff keeps coming back with thesenumbers, and there's a gap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is a gap between the surveys conducted by the personnel department and the research staff.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
MR. ZEISEL. Yes, something of a credibility gap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Zeisel is implying that there is a credibility gap, indicating a disagreement or contention between different parties regarding trustworthiness or credibility.


Passage number 37.
MR. PARTEE. A difference in objectives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is referring to a difference in objectives without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 38.
MR. MARTIN. Let me raise a question about your comment withregard to long-term productivity growth. I'm going to give you theKendrick argument--you know whom I'm referring to--and then you shootit down. The demographics are favoring productivity with regard tothe age brackets, the experience of the labor force--women in thelabor force having been on the job a while--and deregulation. Laborand management have negotiated quite a few work rule changes.[Management can say]: Work on this machine, work on that line, workon this shift, work on that shift. There has been a good deal ofinvestment in business equipment, including computers. The computersmay be a negative, but at any rate a lot of money has been spent onthem supposedly leading to some kind of [increased] output. There isless environmental investment these days; there is not quite so muchworry about what the smokestack looks like but whether or not there is7/16-17/84somebody working underneath the smokestack. Management attitudes area little different; there is a younger breed in some cases. We havepeople who have experienced many years of slow growth and a couple ofrecessions that were close together. Supposedly there is some changein that. There is foreign competition. I could go on and on. But wehave a whole number of factors that point toward getting back to themore historic trend in productivity--2 percent or whatever that is--and yet we seem to be gearing on the 1 percent. This makes adifference in unit labor cost, etc., etc. Can you help me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting a series of factors that could potentially contribute to long-term productivity growth, but they are seeking clarification or confirmation from the person they are speaking to.


Passage number 39.
MR. ZEISEL. It's another one of those things that are verydifficult to grab hold of. Kendrick, I think, would be one of thefirst to admit that in many areas we don't have any very hard [data]that address the issue of productivity growth. He has demographicsand he has a couple of other things, but when you cumulate them theyonly make up a relatively small proportion of the forces that reallydetermine productivity gains. As you point out, productivity in theearly postwar years of the 1950s was in the 2-1/2 percent range andthere has been a progressive deterioration through the postwar years.How do we evaluate what we have. Obviously, productivity has atendency to swing very wildly during a cycle. With real GNP increasesof 9 percent we're going to have a different productivity performancethan when GNP growth is 4 percent. First-quarter productivity appearsto be at about a 4 percent rate. We have a model--I say this with acertain temerity--which attempts to characterize the cyclical behaviorof productivity consistent with the trend; and the numbers that we aregetting at the moment still appear to be consistent with an underlyingtrend in productivity, when adjusted for cyclical performance, in the1-1/4 percent range. There is certainly reason to argue that there isthe prospect for an improved productivity trend. That sort of thingtakes time, however. The introduction of new technology, for example,has a marginal [effect]. It doesn't overwhelmingly change thecharacter of the production process overnight. The effect of thematuring of the labor force again is a slow accretion in productivity.We just don't see enough solid evidence yet to convince us that asignificantly higher productivity trend than we have been able tomeasure is warranted. I think we will know a great deal more within afew quarters when, in a sense, we have a fully matured cycle to lookat. Also, by the way, when we have some revised GNP numbers in a fewdays they may tell us a slightly different story about productivity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion and analysis of productivity growth.


Passage number 40.
MR. ROBERTS. Isn't it true that up to now in this expansion,notwithstanding cost reduction stories and so on, productivity hasgained less than in the average expansion in the postwar period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Roberts, presenting a claim about productivity in the current expansion compared to previous postwar periods.


Passage number 41.
MR. ZEISEL. Yes--that is, to the extent that it's consistentwith a very slow rate of productivity improvement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is making a simple affirmation about the consistency of productivity improvement.


Passage number 42.
 In previousexpansions over the postwar years the underlying productivity trendwas substantially higher and, therefore, the cyclical performance wasoverlaid with a higher--MR. MARTIN. I would suggest to you that a part of that is alag phenomenon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is just a suggestion and an observation being made.


Passage number 43.
 That is, the economy took on so many employees soquickly here that even if these other factors that I cited wereworking toward a 2 or 2-1/2 percent productivity increase, almost 7million people were hired in this past 20 months or whatever and--7/16-17/84MR. ROBERTS. Do you mean that the percentage gain in thelabor force has been higher in this cyclical expansion than in thepast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact by mentioning the high number of employees hired during the economic expansion.


Passage number 44.
MR. MARTIN. Right. It has.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Martin.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 45.
MR. GRAMLEY. That's the converse of the argument thatproductivity hasn't gone up so much; those two are mirror images ofone another. It's hard to use the one to justify the argument thatproductivity is going up faster than it really is. The reasonproductivity didn't go up so fast explains why we had such a bigincrease in employment given the rise in GNP. The rise in GNP in thefirst 6 quarters has been a little above average but not much. So, ifyou had that much larger increase in employment, it is preciselybecause the rise in productivity has not been so great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is arguing against the idea that productivity is increasing rapidly by stating that the rise in employment is actually due to the not-so-great increase in productivity. The speaker believes that the two arguments are contradictory and that the increase in employment is not a result of increased productivity.


Passage number 46.
MR. ROBERTS. Despite all the talk of cost reductions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about cost reductions without any opposing viewpoint or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 47.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think the fact was that the recessionphenomenon was one in which we had a better productivity performancethan one could have anticipated, but there just wasn't any followthrough, if the GNP statistics are right. Now, we may get a revisionto the GNP statistics. But unless we get a marked upward revision,one has to hope for the future in productivity rather than pointing tosomething that's a fact now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses the fact that there was better productivity during the recession than expected, but there hasn't been any significant follow-through. It also mentions the possibility of a revision to the GNP statistics and expresses hope for future productivity. However, there are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 48.
MR. MORRIS. The one piece of evidence we have that mightlend some support to Pres's position--which I share, incidentally--isthat we're seeing this enormous capital goods boom occur at a timewhen the cost of capital is extremely high. We discussed thiswho is the head of acapital goods producing company had this answer: that we have beenstoring up technology in this country for the past ten years or sothat hasn't been applied, and now when companies have the money toinvest they find the productivity of the new technology is so highthat they can afford it--that it makes sense to go ahead--even thoughthe cost of capital is so high. But the fact is that if ourcorporations are making rational decisions, they are expectingextraordinarily high productivity from the capital in which they areinvesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any form of contention or disagreement. The speaker is sharing information and providing support for Pres's position.


Passage number 49.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How much does your inflationprojection come down if we don't get the 15 percent dollar decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for a specific scenario and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 50.
MR. TRUMAN. It would be about 1 percentage point off thefour quarters of 1985. It would make very little difference for 1984at this point but about 1 percentage point for 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the expected impact of a certain percentage point change for the years 1984 and 1985.


Passage number 51.
MR. PARTEE. If the dollar is held steady.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a conditional if-then statement without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 52.
MR. TRUMAN. If we held it steady.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although the passage does not provide a complete statement, there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 53.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have it coming down pretty quickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 54.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, in '85 we have 15 percent [unintelligible]the first year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides a statement from Mr. Truman without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 55.
7/16-17/84MR. BLACK. Ted, is this off the deflator you are talkingabout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage consists of a question being asked by Mr. Black and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 56.
MR. TRUMAN. It's not the deflator [where the decline wouldbe] a little less because of the offsetting effect [of rising importprices]. This would be the CPE [deflator] or the consumer priceindex.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 57.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided does not contain enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 58.
MR. FORRESTAL. That was the question I was going to ask, Mr.Chairman, but let me follow up on it. You are projecting a 15 percentdecline in the value of the dollar. Are you expecting that to occurslowly over the next 18 months or are you expecting it to happen inmid-1985. What's your feel for that. Are we going to get a softlanding of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Forrestal is simply seeking clarification on the timeframe of the projected decline in the value of the dollar.


Passage number 59.
MR. TRUMAN. We're projecting it to happen slowly but it'slikely to happen by fits and starts. If you look at the chart on thedollar's rise, you see that it proceeded by fits and starts; so if andwhen it should ever start to decline, we might well see something likethat trend line but find some jagged moves going down as we have hadsome jagged moves going up. In fact, we started one just after thelast chart show.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the possibility of the dollar's decline in a similar pattern to its rise.


Passage number 60.
MR. FORRESTAL. Could I just ask another question about thedeficit. Your projection is for a deficit of $189 billion in 1985.Does that factor in any deficit reduction measures by the Congress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about the projection of the deficit and whether it includes any deficit reduction measures by the Congress.


Passage number 61.
MR. KICHLINE. Not beyond the Deficit Reduction Act, which ison the President's desk and is estimated to be about $15 billion ofactions for 1985. It is expected that he will sign that and we assumethat an additional $10 billion will come out of further actions in theCongress, particularly in the area of the accommodation between theAdministration and the Congress on defense expenditures. But ourprojection doesn't go beyond this $25 billion area that most folkscurrently are talking about. If we had something major occurring in1985, that is not captured.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and making projections about future actions and expenditures.


Passage number 62.
MR. MARTIN. If the indexing stays in the statute, how doesthat affect things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply posing a question about the potential effects of a specific provision in a statute.


Passage number 63.
MR. KICHLINE. The personal income tax rates. That was nottouched by this Deficit Reduction Act and is scheduled to take effectJanuary 1, 1985. We estimate that to be worth about $5 billion.Assuming that our price forecast of about a 4 percent rise is right,that would translate into a revenue loss for 1985 of about $5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of estimates regarding the personal income tax rates and the projected revenue loss for 1985.


Passage number 64.
MR. MORRIS. But don't those numbers get very much bigger asyou go out a few years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 65.
MR. KICHLINE. That's correct. They grow over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 66.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Based on the given information, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 67.
MR. BALLES. I have another question on the exchange value ofthe dollar. Some analysts believe that this recent action toeliminate the 30 percent withholding on foreign-owned U.S. securities7/16-17/84is cause for a renewed surge of funding for the United States to takeadvantage of. Is that likely to change your forecast of a 15 percentdecline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 68.
MR. TRUMAN. There may be some [effect], but I would notexpect it to be substantial basically because most people could getinto dollar-denominated assets on a tax-free basis already and theredidn't have to be a withholding tax move in order to change that. Myassumption would be that most major portfolios in the world alreadywere into essentially tax-exempt dollar-denominated assets, so wewould not get a move from nondollar- to dollar-denominated assetsbecause of a change in the tax. There might be some marginal effect.Some people are pointing to Japanese pension funds as one area wherethe fact that there was withholding tax [was a factor] and they mayhave a preference for safer U.S. market-oriented instruments.Therefore, there might be a slight change in the portfolio between yenand dollars. But in general I think it would be unlikely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Truman, is expressing his opinion and making assumptions about the potential effects of a withholding tax on dollar-denominated assets. He does mention that some people are pointing to Japanese pension funds as an example, but this does not indicate a disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 69.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We learn from experience--and I have greatsympathy--that nothing changes that 15 percent decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact or observation about something without expressing any conflicting opinions or views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 70.
MR. TRUMAN. We'll fool you next time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement "We'll fool you next time" implies a disagreement or opposition between the speaker (Mr. Truman) and the person/people being addressed.


Passage number 71.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I was going to ask how come 15 percent.Last time you told us that it needed to drop 45 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement by MR. PARTEE.


Passage number 72.
MR. TRUMAN. First installment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Truman, is providing information or making a statement without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 73.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, they have always said 15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "No, they have always said 15 percent" is a straightforward response to a question or statement that supports the consistent stance of the subject.


Passage number 74.
MR. TRUMAN. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 75.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any other comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is simply asking for any additional comments.


Passage number 76.
MS. SEGER. May I ask another productivity question. Ihaven't seen your model but I've been very interested in theproductivity issue and I too have seen a lot of people withfundamentally different ideas about what is happening to productivity.Did your model forecast the size of the improvement of productivitylast year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question about whether a model forecasted the improvement of productivity.


Passage number 77.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes. Let me talk a little about this. I havebeen asking similar questions and probably have been living with these"models" more than Jerry. Essentially what we're talking about is,starting in 1980 and going forward, trying to explain or decomposeactual productivity growth into a cyclical component and its long-termtrend component. In the preceding period of the '70s, about 0.6percent is the estimated trend growth of productivity. Now, a 1.1percent--or with the revised data I think it's 1-1/4 percent--increase in trend productivity growth is very close [to theexperience] quarter by quarter from 1980 through the second quarter of1984. So, in a sense, that explains it; it does very well with thattrend and a few other variables in decomposing the two components. Sowhat we have to be looking for is [something] saying that this can'texplain the total productivity growth, and we haven't really foundthat yet. I might say that the last four quarters changed a tenthfrom 1.1 to 1.2 percent, so it may well be that future observationswill suggest that we're far off. But we're somewhat hesitant at the7/16-17/84moment because in fact we've done very well for the last three years.If a change is coming, it's really in the future. It's not in ourreading of the past. There are other folks--productivity experts onthe outside--who in looking at the past would argue the same. Butthere are many issues that suggest productivity trends may be in theprocess of change; that has not yet shown through and we would be thefirst to admit that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own research and findings on productivity growth and stating that they have not found any evidence to suggest that the current productivity trend cannot explain the total productivity growth. They also mention that other outside experts may have different perspectives on the issue, but there is no direct disagreement or argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 78.
MR. MARTIN. If you took some other period prior to the firstoil shock--I don't know what period, but suppose you took 1965 through1974 or something like that--what kind of independent variables wouldyou get and what kind of model would that produce.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention anything that indicates contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a hypothetical situation regarding independent variables and the resulting model.


Passage number 79.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, you'd get the same sort of analysis,which comes up with trend productivity growth at 2-1/2 to 3 percent,depending upon the time period you pick. You mentioned the 3 percentnumber in the future. That really was [true], for example, for theperiod of the '50s and the first half of the '60s. Later on, andafter the oil shock in particular, is when we found the dismalproductivity growth. So, if we return to that--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage describes different periods of productivity growth and mentions different numbers, but there is no clear disagreement or contention present. The speaker is simply discussing different time periods and their corresponding productivity growth rates.


Passage number 80.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we didn't have the drop in thedollar in our model and yet we come out with an inflation projectionthe same as the staff's. I guess that's at the low end, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely stating a fact and acknowledging that their projection aligns with the staff's projection, although it may be on the low end.


Passage number 81.
MR. PARTEE. With no drop in the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 82.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. With no drop in the dollar we cameout about the same as the staff in our inflation [projection].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there was no drop in the dollar and they came out about the same as the staff in their inflation projection.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 83.
MR. GRAMLEY. One of the determining factors will be whetheror not we get 2-3/4 percent real GNP growth fourth quarter to fourthquarter for 1985 or, let us say, 1/2 or 3/4 percentage point more.We're getting down into the range on the unemployment rate where thatmuch additional growth, quite possibly, could trigger quite differentresponses in labor market conditions and wage rates than the staff hasanticipated. Similarly, an additional half percentage point real GNPgrowth would result in maybe 1-1/2 to 2 percentage points [more] inmanufacturing output and that gets the capacity utilization rate intoa range in which we begin to have problems. So, while the staff'sforecast might not be unbelievable in terms of internal consistency, asomewhat stronger economy can produce quite different results.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, suggests that there may be disagreement or contention between the staff's forecast and his own view of the potential impact of higher growth on labor market conditions and capacity utilization rate. He states that a stronger economy could produce quite different results than anticipated by the staff's forecast.


Passage number 84.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What weight do you put in these remarkablylow wage trends from the fact that the index that goes into wages isalso remarkably low so far. I think for the past year or so theconsumer price index W or whatever it's called [unintelligible] isfully 1 percent lower than the one that everybody looks at. And [thedifference is] more than that this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a comparison between the consumer price index (CPI) and wages, noting that the CPI has been lower than expected.


Passage number 85.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's important. We do that exercise.I don't have the disaggregation in our [material here]. But it's veryclear that the feedback effects from low rates of inflation and lowCOLAS do track into lower rates of wage increase. We do have thatnumber, and maybe while I mumble here Jerry can find it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the importance of tracking feedback effects from low rates of inflation and low COLAS into lower rates of wage increase.


Passage number 86.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That index is going to reverse on us now,isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any disagreement or contention. It is expressing uncertainty or speculation about the future direction of an index.


Passage number 87.
7/16-17/84MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's correct--in our forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in the given passage. It appears to be a statement or response without any conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 88.
MR. PARTEE. If mortgage rates rise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 89.
MR. KICHLINE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's right" is an agreement or confirmation of a previous statement.


Passage number 90.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was going down while mortgage rateswere rising because of this mix problem, I take it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating an observation about the correlation between a decrease in something (presumably housing prices) and an increase in mortgage rates. The phrase "because of this mix problem" could potentially refer to a cause, but without further context, it is difficult to determine the exact nature of the problem or any potential disagreement.


Passage number 91.
MR. KICHLINE. We don't have the COLA separately. Iapologize. But that is important and, in any event, it does reverse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline is simply apologizing for not having the requested information and acknowledging the importance of the topic being discussed.


Passage number 92.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, on the subject of differences inforecasts, in Cleveland we have forecast a very strong underlyingeconomy--stronger than the staff's--through the third quarter of '85because of the assumptions. We make essentially no assumption aboutexchange rate changes; we have a five percent [decline]. But we madean assumption about fiscal policy that there would be a second downpayment, if you will, enacted in the fourth quarter of this year orthe first quarter of next year. And that would bite in the fourthquarter of '85. So then our pattern is a strong economy, not aslowing one--surprising us. We have a strong economy in 1985, growingat about a 4 percent real rate until the fourth quarter. That givesus an inflation projection very close to the staff's projection, butit does have the significant risk that the exchange rate correction,when it occurs, could bring about even more inflation. And we haven'treally dealt effectively with the wage rate issue in our set ofassumptions, and we consider that the other major risk besides theexchange rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is an explanation of the assumptions and forecasts made by the speaker.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 93.
MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of the task of sitting down and doingone of these forecasts twice a year, as Mr. Kichline knows, it isnever very easy. From my perspective right now it's harder than ithas been because on the one hand we have an economy that on thesurface--by most indicators, statistical and otherwise--looksabsolutely terrific. But underneath that gloss we have some veryserious problems that seem to me on balance to be getting worse ratherthan better, and that colors my thinking about a forecast. Forexample, as Jim indicated, the Federal budget deficit in a structuralsense continues to deteriorate in a very significant way and withnothing in sight that I know of that is going to change that. AndJim's estimate of the structural budget deficit next year of $172billion is literally off the scale of experience. Similarly, andagain notwithstanding the spectacular performance of the aggregateeconomy, high interest rates are clearly placing very serious strainson selected classes of domestic and international debtors. Thebanking system, to put it mildly, is fragile. The conditions areaffecting all sizes of banks and thrifts which, as Jim indicated, arenow right back on the edge, if not worse. As for external trade, thefinancial position of the United States, which is helpful in somerespects for us and for others, now leaves us highly vulnerable to thesudden and sharp fall of the dollar. Whether that will materialize,of course, is another question. From my perspective, looking at thefirst six months of this year, it seems to me that what we have on ourhands is a good old fashioned credit binge--almost irrespective ofwhich set of numbers we look at. They all say the same thing; andsome of them relative to GNP or relative to inflation or relative tosomething are outside the spectrum of experience. Against that7/16-17/84background, as I said, I find it very hard to make a forecast. Forwhat it's worth the forecast that I've come up with is one that showsthe real economy a little stronger, by 1/2 point or so, than the staffhas. I have no real good reason for that other than my sense of thesheer momentum that the economy has right now, notwithstanding thehigh interest rates.In the inflation area, which I really think is the swingvariable for 1985, I also found it very tough [to make a forecast].In July of last year and February of this year, I had an inflationforecast that was very much at the bottom of the range of Committeemembers' forecasts. And I had it that way for two fundamentalreasons. One was that I thought the economy was going to be strongerand at that phase of the cycle a stronger economy implied strongerproductivity in a context in which wage restraint was still very muchin evidence. Clearly, in retrospect, inflation was better than even Ihad thought and I attribute that almost exclusively to the dollar.Looking at 1985, unlike 1984, I have an inflation forecast of almost 6percent on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis, which is on thehigh side of the Committee members' forecasts. I ended up there withconsiderable reluctance. But fundamentally the reason I ended upthere was that I did have in mind an acceleration, however modest, incompensation, very much like the staff's. Strangely enough I had inmind stronger productivity growth than the staff, at around 1-1/2percent. But the difference in my case is that my forecast basicallyassumes that we will continue to have a positive spread, on the orderof 1-1/2 to 2 percent, between the deflator and the rise in unit laborcosts in the economy. I arrived at that for three reasons. First, itis certainly not without a precedent at this stage of the recovery.Second, we are moving into ranges of capacity utilization andunemployment that seem to me to imply at least some further pressuresin those areas. Last, but certainly not least and perhaps mostimportantly, I continue to think that the point will come when thedollar will have to come off; and if it does come off, my view is thatthe potential effects of that on domestic inflation coming from thedirect effect on imported prices and also the indirect effect on thekind of restraint that these imports are producing could be evengreater than the 1 percent that Mr. Truman spoke of. I am, of course,mindful of the fact that not only wage statistics but commodity pricesand other things right now could very well lead to a different view oninflation. But even in terms of commodity prices, I assume at themoment that an awful lot of that also is a direct and indirectreflection of the international situation. I am not yet ready toconclude that its effects will be permanent over the forecast cycle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, acknowledges that on the surface the economy looks great, but he believes there are serious problems that are getting worse. He highlights issues such as the deteriorating federal budget deficit, high interest rates, a fragile banking system, and vulnerability to a fall in the dollar. He also expresses reluctance in making inflation forecasts and disagrees with the staff's forecast on certain factors. Overall, Mr. Corrigan's perspective differs from the optimistic view of the "spectacular performance" of the economy.


Passage number 94.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the one thing that throws offthe historical relationship between labor costs and prices is therather unique price constraint influence of imports. It is unique inthis recovery to such a degree. I continue to run into businessmenwho keep talking about the fact that even though volume has picked upthey can't raise prices; they can't get the margin because of importcompetition. And unless you make an assumption that the exchangerates [are] going to come down significantly, it seems to me you comeup with a fairly low projection of inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and observations about the influence of imports on labor costs and prices. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 95.
MR. CORRIGAN. I would agree with that. As I said, there isno question in my own thinking that precisely those circumstances youhave described are one of the reasons why I end up with a higher rate-10-7/16-17/84of inflation. I think at some point in the cycle the dollar will comeoff and the effect of that on domestic prices will be greater than theaverage effect one picks up by looking at models. The reverse isclearly true, in a context in which the dollar were to stay evenwithin, say, 5 or 10 percent of where it is now over the wholeforecast period. To me that would easily translate into a percentagepoint, if not more, of better price performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan is agreeing with the previous statement and providing additional explanation and examples to support his agreement.


Passage number 96.
MR. MARTIN. Not only are there firms that are reluctant toraise prices but some firms have raised prices and have had to backoff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement describes a situation where some firms have raised prices but were ultimately forced to lower them again.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are busy getting legislation enacted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The passage simply states that "they" (presumably politicians or lawmakers) are busy getting legislation enacted, without any opposing views or conflicting statements indicated.


Passage number 98.
MR. TRUMAN. There are only two features, I think, to thedollar's role. Its rise has helped to hold down inflation, and evenif it stops rising the rate of inflation has been suppressed becauseof the dollar's rise. Then if it should decline, as we believe iteventually will, we will pay back some of the dividends that we hadcollected. One of the problems--and it's been seen in other countries--is that you start assuming that the underlying rate of inflation isthe rate of inflation that's associated with a continuously risingcurrency and then that leads to some distortion in and of itself inthe way macro policy operates. Then once you get to the point--I'mthinking particularly of Germany--where you come down the other sideof that mountain, that creates its own problems. Everybody has beenamused at the constant 15 percent [dollar decline we have forecast];it is obviously a somewhat notional figure--less precise than some ofthe other imprecise numbers in our forecast. But I think it is partlymotivated by the view that eventually we will have not only a[cessation] of this benefit but a rolling back of some of it. Andit's better, at least in terms of thinking about what the correctunderlying rate of inflation might be and in trying to forecast therate even though the short-run favorable developments on the inflationside might be continuing because of the dollar's value.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the two features of the dollar's role and discussing the potential consequences of a decline in the dollar's value.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 100.
MR. BALLES. It's hard to pinpoint the precise reason why ourstaff forecast is a bit higher than the Board staff's on the inflationrate for next year. But I think it probably has to do with ourestimate that as we get into 1985 we will be approaching or at thepoint, both in terms of the capacity utilization rising and theunemployment rate declining, where in the past we typically have seenan acceleration of inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a difference in forecasts between their staff and the Board staff, and speculating on the reasons for the difference.


Passage number 101.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 102.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a difficult questionto ask. I don't know who to ask, but the staff is forecasting a $115billion current account deficit in 1985 and a decline in the exchangerate of the dollar against foreign currencies of 15 percent. Myquestion is: What levels of interest rates are going to be required toattract that amount of foreign capital to the United States in aregime in which the foreign investor may be contemplating furtherdevaluation of the dollar, and what will be the implications for theeconomy of that level of interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply asking a difficult question and seeking information about the implications of certain economic conditions.


Passage number 103.
-11-7/16-17/84MR. AXILROD. Well, we have only a small rise in interestrates in the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a fact or statement without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 104.
MR. MORRIS. I know. That's what I don't understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes a statement made by Mr. Morris, expressing his lack of understanding. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 105.
MR. AXILROD. It would be a lot higher if you don't want thedollar to go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a hypothetical scenario where the dollar's value would be higher if the desire was to prevent it from decreasing.


Passage number 106.
MR. TRUMAN. President Morris is saying that if the dollargoes down, somehow we need even higher interest rates in order toprevent it from going down faster.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply paraphrasing President Morris's perspective on the relationship between the dollar's value, interest rates, and preventing a faster decline in the dollar.


Passage number 107.
MR. AXILROD. We think we have a mutually consistent set ofrelationships. It entails somewhat higher interest rates, the sharpdrop in the dollar, and the projected rate of inflation. We wouldargue, I guess, that if you think the dollar isn't going to go down,you need a lot higher interest rates. I don't know quite how toanswer the question otherwise. If you believe that people don't wantto hold dollars to the extent that we implicitly are saying, you'reforced to argue that you have to pay them a lot more to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their own perspective and arguing for their point of view without directly contradicting anyone else.


Passage number 108.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think at this time we don't have theanswer to your questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests that there is currently no available answer to the questions being asked.


Passage number 109.
MR. PARTEE. He said it was a difficult question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply states that someone else said it was a difficult question.


Passage number 110.
MR. MORRIS. It seems to me that if there is something wrongwith this forecast, it's in this area. Can we carry this off neatlywithout any significant change in interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Morris is expressing his opinion about a concern in the forecast, but there is no disagreement expressed by anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 111.
MR. AXILROD. But these are high real interest rates still--very high relative to the rest of the world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement is a factual observation about interest rates relative to the rest of the world. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 112.
MR. MORRIS. But we're also asking the rest of the worldafter investing $100 billion in the United States this year to come upwith another $115 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states a fact and does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a request for additional investment.


Passage number 113.
MR. TRUMAN. But the point is that in the last 12 months theyhave over-invested in the United States or in dollar-denominatedassets or the dollar wouldn't have appreciated by 15 percent or so.It's no more illogical that the dollar would go down slightly in thisinterest rate forecast than that the dollar would go up with adoubling of the current account deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It presents an argument about the appreciation of the dollar and the potential impact of interest rate forecasts on its value.


Passage number 114.
MR. MORRIS. But the fact that that has happened means thatat the end of this year foreign investors are going to be sitting witha big accumulation of dollars. And the question is whether we canfinance this current account deficit without offering much greaterinducements for them to hold more dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the accumulation of dollars and posing a question about financing the current account deficit.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Excellent question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Excellent question." It is simply a positive remark acknowledging the quality of the question asked.


Passage number 116.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But right now they are more thanfinancing the current account deficit. That's why the dollar isrising, you see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting a cause and effect relationship between the current account deficit and the rise of the dollar.


Passage number 117.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage doesn't contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Morris simply states that he understands something.


Passage number 118.
-12-7/16-17/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And the financial markets in NewYork--I don't know whether they are right or not--are placing enormousemphasis on the abolition of a 30 percent withholding tax. And eventhough there are very strongly mixed views about it, the possibilitythat the Treasury might consider bearer bonds is a separate issue.There are a lot of people who feel that there are going to be somesubstantial flows from that; and we're still getting some intrabankassistance as well. The dollar is being pulled back from theEurodollar market, which is helping to finance the current accountdeficit. My sense is that even though, obviously, it's almost atautology in the long run--neither we nor the world can accept thatlarge current account deficit to finance indefinitely--I wouldn'tassume it is going to be in 1985 necessarily that we're going to seethat kind of change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their observations and opinions on various financial market issues, but there is no indication of any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 120.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have very little confidence ineconomic forecasts--my own in particular--but forecast we must, so Iguess I will have to bare my soul. Like most everybody else, we endedup pretty close to the staff's forecast for 1984. But when we got to1985 we differed in the same direction that Jerry Corrigan did, onlymore so. We came out with a little higher real growth, but the maindifference was on the inflation side. We were on the high end of thatand we would stress the factors that he stressed, but also would pointout that we still have not yet paid the piper for the rather rapidgrowth--or what I view as rather rapid growth--in the money supply inthe past. And even after allowing for the possibility of a rightwardshift in the demand for money, I still think we're going to see moreinflation probably than the staff is projecting. This, obviously, isone argument that I don't want to win.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black expresses his disagreement with the staff's forecast for 1985, particularly regarding inflation. He believes that there will be more inflation than the staff is projecting due to rapid growth in the money supply. However, he also mentions that he does not want to win this argument, suggesting that he may not be completely confident in his own prediction.


Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can all be encouraged to know thatMilton Friedman has decided that with the downward shift in velocityof--I can't remember whether it's 8 percent or 11 percent--all betsare off in the future for inflationary implications of that rapidgrowth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply shares information about Milton Friedman's stance on the future inflationary implications of a downward shift in velocity.


Passage number 122.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. He has retracted that inflationary[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 123.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides no information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 124.
MR. KEEHN. Our forecast with regard to the GNP this year andnext year is perhaps a touch higher than the staff's, and ourinflation [forecast] is broadly consistent--a bit higher. But amongstall the good news, and I really do think we have a very powerfuleconomic expansion in place, I continue to be distressed by theunevenness of it all. The people I talk to, particularly those peoplewho run large capital intensive heavy industry companies, arecontinuing to experience very, very difficult times; by no means havethey in any way really caught up with the euphoria that seems to bepresent in other areas. I tried to look at this a bit. We took theindustrial production index and assumed that 1979 was 100 and thenlooked at the April physical output numbers in various parts of thatindex. A lot of these are the industries that are central to theMidwest. For example, in the primary metal category, consumer durablesteel was 75 percent for April of 1984 versus 100 for 1979; equipment-13-7/16-17/84steel was 53 percent versus 100 for 1979; farm tractors were 35percent; construction and equipment were 78 percent; the big tractorslike the kind Caterpillar makes were 40 percent; railroad equipment,which I have commented on in the past, was 15 percent.SPEAKER(.). Fifteen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing concerns about the unevenness of the economic expansion and the difficult times experienced by certain industries.


Passage number 125.
MR. KEEHN. It was 15, but that's not quite fair because 1979was, for some tax reasons, a uniquely high year. But as you go downthese individual categories in the industrial production index, manyof these big, heavy [machinery] companies are still operating at very,very low rates. Universally, the people I talk with say that thevalue of the dollar is of extreme concern. And we think that will bekey to our forecast for next year. Caterpillar, for example, is aclassic example of a company that just has been decimated, bothdomestically and in the export markets. Therefore, I look at thenumbers and statistically they all seem to make great sense and I canfind no overall reason to disagree. But I have this nagging feelingas I look around at many of these big companies that, with thecontinuation of the trends with regard to interest rates and the valueof the dollar or both, something could come a little unglued here aswe look to the forecast--not so much this year, but next year. It'sthis unevenness that I find in the industrial component that has meparticularly worried.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their concern about the value of the dollar and the potential effects on certain industries, but they do not mention any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 126.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 127.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think we're at a stage in the business cyclein which the uncertainties of forecasting are a heck of a lot greaterthan they have been. If you look at a recovery in prospect, thefirst four to six quarters do differ from one cycle to the next butnot all that much. But what happens after you get up to where we arenow is much harder to foresee. It's certainly very logical toanticipate some slowdown in the pace of the economic expansion butwhether we slow down to something like a 3 percent rate, let us say,or a 4 percent rate, makes a hell of a lot of difference to the rateof resource utilization when it is up this high and, therefore, toprice behavior. The other big factor on the price side now that makesprice forecasting very, very uncertain is the issue that Frank waspointing out about the accumulation of dollars abroad and what thatmeans for interest rates. When we have dollars accumulating abroad onthe scale that has been occurring, the willingness of foreigners tocontinue accumulation on anything like the scale that the staff isforecasting depends on what happens to prices here and what happens totheir expectations of prices. If we get the beginnings of someupswing in wages and prices in the United States, it will then inducethe kind of drop in the value of the dollar that Chuck is talkingabout, which in turn will reinforce this price cycle. And that's whyit seems to me the outlook for prices is very, very uncertain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the uncertainties and difficulties of forecasting in the current business cycle, particularly in regards to predicting the pace of economic expansion and price behavior. They mention factors such as resource utilization, interest rates, and the accumulation of dollars abroad that contribute to the uncertainty in price forecasting.


Passage number 128.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 129.
MR. BOEHNE. In times like this when nobody knows what reallyis going to happen--more so than most other times--what we say aboutthe economy tells more about the people [talking] than it does aboutthe economy. Some people are just pessimists by nature and basicallysay: "Well, things are good but that means they have to get bad." AndI think that's in most of us; it's our central banking blood. Others-14-7/16-17/84are optimists and believe things are good and they are going tocontinue. I think the truth probably is somewhere in between. That'snot very profound, but I suppose things won't turn out as bad as wethink nor as good as we think. My own hunch is that we may end upwith less inflation than one might expect in this kind of businesscycle, largely because of the dollar. I just hear everywhere abouthow much a constraint it is on prices. We've been hearing that thedollar is going to come down, down, down and maybe it will at somepoint. Like Tony, I think it will come down but further out there onthe horizon; and I think this is going to have a positive effect oninflation. On the growth side, we have talked mostly about what ishappening in the real sector, but the financial side of the economyreally is in pretty fragile condition. Just what those linkages areand how they spill over to the real side are hard to define, largelybecause so much of it is psychological. But it does seem to me thatover an 18-month time horizon the fragility on the financial side isbound to have some downward impact on the economy. So, my hunch isthat we probably will end up with both less inflation and less growthin 1985 than one might normally expect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a personal reflection and prediction of the speaker, without any opposing viewpoints or contradictory statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 130.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think there is an awful lotof uncertainty as we try to make a forecast at this particular time.Generally speaking, we agree with most of the staff forecast with theexception of the inflation and unemployment numbers. I do think thatthe staff's inflation numbers are low. We look more for a 6 percentinflation number, fourth quarter '85 over fourth quarter '84, basedpretty much on reasons that have already been alluded to by othermembers--namely, the depreciation of the dollar and so on. But I alsothink it is very unrealistic to think that the wage concessions andwage moderation that we fortunately have had so far are going tocontinue. Nobody knows, of course, what is going to happen with theautomobile negotiations but I'm fearful that they could turn out to bedifficult. And there are other wage pressures that I think are goingto develop in the economy.The other thing that I haven't heard mentioned, which wefactored into our projection, is the monetary growth through aboutmid-1984. So, I think the factors of expansionary policy, wagepressures, depreciation of the dollar, and capacity constraints--whichwe certainly see in our District, incidentally--augur for a somewhathigher inflation rate than the staff projects. Also, as theunemployment rate goes through 7 percent, those wage pressures aregoing to increase as well. I also think unemployment is going to be abit higher than the staff suggests, but otherwise I think theirprojection is pretty accurate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Forrestal disagrees with the staff's inflation and unemployment numbers and provides reasons why he believes they are too low. He also mentions factors such as wage pressures, depreciation of the dollar, and capacity constraints that he believes will result in a higher inflation rate than projected by the staff. Additionally, he suggests that unemployment will be slightly higher than the staff suggests.


Passage number 131.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to answer this question without the passage you are referring to. Could you please provide the passage or more context for clarification?


Passage number 132.
MR. BOYKIN. I'm no more confident in my own forecast thanothers are [in theirs]. In terms of real growth, we're about wherethe Board staff is; we have a little higher nominal GNP and are higheron the deflator. When we are as uncertain as we are, maybe we canlearn something from history just from the standpoint of where we arein the cycle. We are going into the third year of recovery;inflationary pressures tend to increase at that point. Looking at ittoday, it feels considerably different. But we've said that, [thusfar] at least, this recovery is pretty well tracking a normalrecovery. So, it makes one wonder if it really is going to be that-15-7/16-17/84different as we go forward. I have some real concerns about theexchange value of the dollar. If the drop-off does materialize, thatwill likely bring inflation pressures back on the domestic side.Given capacity utilization and the other things that we normally lookat, it just seems to me that pressures are going to start building aswe get into 1985. Therefore, I'm not as optimistic on inflation asthe staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boykin expresses concerns about the exchange value of the dollar and the potential for inflation pressures in 1985, while the staff's forecast may be more optimistic about inflation.


Passage number 133.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By a considerable margin. GovernorWallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The phrase "By a considerable margin" indicates that there is a clear and undisputed difference or superiority in something, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 134.
MR. WALLICH. My numbers are on the high side of theforecasts, but not extraordinarily so. I ask myself: If these numberscome out approximately like this, what happens at the end of 1985. Dowe then level off forever at a moderate rate of inflation and at amoderate rate of unemployment. Do we go on up toward higher rates ofinflation. Do we encounter on the way--either before or after the endof 1985--a downturn. The answers, obviously, are unknowable. But ifthe numbers turn out pretty good through '85, as they are projectedhere, the chance is that it means we will be into a rather long andcontinued period of expansion that will carry us to a very low rate ofunemployment and considerably higher rates of inflation. That seemsto me the likely outcome of the present numbers being true. At most,the staff projections would get us to a growth rate below 3 percent,which would suggest that we are tapering off toward an even lower rateof expansion than potential that theoretically could be sustainablefor a very long time. It's contrary to history. The economy eitherexpands or contracts over time. And I'm concerned that the makings ofa stronger and longer expansion are likely to leave us eventually outon a limb with high rates of inflation. Well, I guess I've expressedno more than my usual prejudice on the subject.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is expressing his own opinion and speculation about the potential outcomes of the projected numbers. He acknowledges that the answers are unknowable and mentions his concern about the possibility of high rates of inflation in the future. However, he acknowledges that his viewpoint may be influenced by his personal prejudice on the subject.


Passage number 135.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would you be reassured if we allthought there would be a recession in '86.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is simply asking for the reader's personal opinion about whether they would be reassured by the possibility of a recession in '86.


Passage number 136.
MR. WALLICH. I would certainly be reassured, but I wouldprefer then to try to modulate that rather than run into it helterskelter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a preference for a certain approach but does not refute or oppose any previous statement or idea.


Passage number 137.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The passage only mentions the name of Governor Martin without providing any context or information.


Passage number 138.
MR. MARTIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, we have discussed whether ornot this expansion is typical of cycles, if we eliminate a couple ofthem. It seems to me that this expansion is significantly morevigorous than the typical cycle. That's certainly true of employment,as we have already touched upon. That always raises the question ofwhether we try to do too much in too short a period of time--in 20months or whatever it has been. Is this expansion too fast in thesense of being inflationary. It seems to me that there already hasbeen some slowing. We all have conceded the difficulties offorecasting and we know numbers are revised and revised and revised.But, just looking at the numbers, in terms of nominal GNP the range is13.9 to 9.8 percent [unintelligible]. In the [remarks] of our twelvecolleagues around the country, the comment that the rate of expansionis slowing is almost unanimously true of that group. Is a drop innominal of 4.1 percentage points over some period of time enough. Ifwe look at the calendar year 1985, using the staff forecast we getnominal GNP of 8.4 percent. Is that still too high a rate of growth.-16-7/16-17/84I think in terms of those absolutes, it's difficult to make a case.Is business fixed investment coming on stream too fast. The firstestimate of the rate of growth in the second quarter was almost 21percent. But it is equipping; it is retrofitting; it is productivityoriented; and it's pretty short term. Only now are we beginning tobuild a plant as distinct from equipment, and so the payback in termsof output should be reasonably short term. As for capacityutilization, it's difficult to factor in all that retrofitting ofplant into the bare number of the domestic capacity utilization and,unfortunately, no one has figured a really good way to figure thecapacity utilization of all those thousands of firms around thePacific Basin and in Europe and the developing countries that areselling to us. I don't know how to measure it; maybe no one knows howto measure that capacity utilization. Are we expanding too fast.We're not back to any reasonable trend line using various recentperiods of time and using GNP growth. It seems to me that the casefor arguing that we're expanding too fast is a weak one. I've triedto reflect that and probably have failed in my numbers, which aresomewhat at variance with those of the staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply presenting their views and analysis of the current economic expansion. They discuss different factors such as employment, inflation, GNP growth, and capacity utilization, but there is no opposition or dispute presented.


Passage number 139.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as "Governor Partee" is mentioned without any surrounding context or statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 140.
MR. PARTEE. I've been reflecting on Jerry's comment aboutfinancial fragility, which contrasts so sharply with the strongeconomy. And I suppose that the link is what Henry is talking about:the next recession. There are probably many roads to recession. Butone that seems quite certain to me is to get into an environment inwhich interest rates have to increase substantially, because I think asubstantial increase in interest rates, in fact, would turn thefinancial system on its ear--certainly the thrifts, probably the LDCs,and very possibly some of these people who have signed up for variablerate mortgages and that kind of thing. And, of course, the thing thatbothers me is that if you look at past recoveries, we've always gotteninto a period in which interest rates went up substantially toward theend of the recovery. So, I suppose the best and safest insurance thatwe could buy would be to try to insure that the economy does not growso rapidly as to bring the inflationary consequences that will lead tosubstantially higher interest rates and bring the next recession.Now, the reason I haven't commented along those lines is that thestaff forecast, I think, does that. That is, the staff forecast givesus a [slowing of] real growth in time to keep off some of these touchpoints that Lyle was talking about. It gives us a 3 percent rate ofreal GNP growth, roughly, in the four quarters of 1985. I have toadmit that I forecast the same thing, but I'm darned if I know why Idid because, taking it right up to where we are today, everything isstronger--and quite a lot stronger--than that. Maybe it's just a hopethat the real growth will recede to a point where we can live with itover an extended period rather than a true forecast that all of us areexpressing here. As I said, there is nothing in the consumptionfigures or certainly in business and plant and equipment spending oreven in housing so far that would give one the strong assurance thatthe 3 percent rate of growth would be established by the latter partof this year. And I think we need to try to guard against thepossibility that for the quarters ahead, as in the quarters past, wewill find real results to be substantially greater than what had beenforecast beforehand. That is very important because, otherwise, I dothink the financial system is going to tumble.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses concern about the potential for a future recession and the fragility of the financial system if interest rates were to increase substantially. They also express doubt about the accuracy of the current economic forecast and the need to guard against higher than expected economic growth. This suggests a level of disagreement or contention about the state of the economy and the potential risks it faces.


Passage number 141.
-17-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage is a mathematical expression and does not contain any claims or opinions that can lead to contention or disagreement. It is simply a calculation.


Passage number 142.
MR. ROBERTS. Well, I won't repeat the comments that othershave made, many of which I would have stated. But I feel that thecyclical momentum of this expansion will probably carry us comfortablythrough 1985. I think growth is slowing now and that growth willcontinue as we approach capacity utilization as it always does. Ithink price pressures will increase from capacity utilization andprobably from a leveling of the dollar rather than a decline and fromthe lagged effect of rapid monetary growth in the past. That leads meto the point that is critical: that we not provide excess moneygrowth to fuel inflation in the future. I share Governor Wallich'sview that we will have a critical problem at the end of 1985 if we dothat. As to financial fragility, I'm aware of Continental's situationand the fact that the thrifts on an operating basis are breaking evenor are slightly in the red. But to put that in perspective: We'vebeen through a stiff recession. There is always a lagged effect ofproblem loans after one of those. If I'm not mistaken, thenonperforming assets in March were lower than they were at year-end.And we have some specialized problems, including the energy situation,which seems to be improving some. My own guess is that we couldeasily exaggerate this, including on the LDC front; it appears to methat major progress is being made. So, I'm not concerned that amoderate increase in interest rates, which would appear to beappropriate in terms of the direction of the economy, would in any waycause a major problem in the financial system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 143.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've had a long and I guess usefuldiscussion. If nobody else wants to say anything--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage indicates that the discussion was long and possibly useful, but there is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 144.
MR. RICE. Since my forecast is rather way out, I'd like tosay a word. Ed Boehne pointed out that a lot of the forecasts reflectindividual personalities and whether one is a pessimist or anoptimist. When things are going poorly, I'm an optimist and I expectthings to get better; when they are going very well, I'm a pessimistand I expect them to get worse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes how the speaker's outlook can change based on the current circumstances.


Passage number 145.
MR. PARTEE. You can make money on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "You can make money on that."


Passage number 146.
MR. RICE. So, while my forecast was very close to the medianfor 1984, it's way out of line for 1985 and I'm going to revise itbecause I've been influenced by both the staff forecast and some ofthe comments I've heard. Basically, I forecast a growth recessionstarting in the latter part of 1985; I just thought somebody shouldreflect that possibility among our forecasts. Based on what I'veheard and what I've looked at more recently, I don't really expectthat to happen. But it seems to me to be a possibility--enough of apossibility to note. Having made my forecast before the latestfigures on unemployment and employment and some of the more recentdata reflecting more strength than I had assumed, I had real GNPfalling off very substantially in the latter half of 1985. So, I cameout on the low side for growth in 1985 and that's the basis for myway-out forecast. The reason is simply that real interest rates arerising very rapidly. The price forecast is very favorable but at thesame time our forecast is for rising interest rates. And realinterest rates now, and as projected, are going to be fairly close towhere they were in the latter part of '81 and early '82, at whichpoint the economy began to reflect this by turning down. I think it-18-7/16-17/84is distinctly possible, though not probable, that in the latter halfof next year we will see such a severe slowing in real output that wecould think of it as a growth recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, is revising his forecast and acknowledging the possibility of a growth recession, but ultimately states that he does not expect it to happen. He explains his reasoning based on recent data and the rise in real interest rates. There is no contradiction or disagreement presented in this passage.


Passage number 147.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to go on to Mr. Axilrod'spresentation before we quit today. But before we do that, I just wantto say a few things myself. I want to ask, because it has been on alot of people's minds in this city, about a theory going around thatwe are on the verge of deflation--a theory that is widely publicizedby one group morning, noon, and night. It has been an expanding groupin political terms. I haven't detected it, but I just want to confirmthat that theory that we're close to some deflationary movement is notshared by anybody around this table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 148.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's price deflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 149.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's price deflation as I read thesethings--price deflation followed by severe recession down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply conveying the speaker's interpretation of the situation, predicting price deflation and a subsequent severe recession.


Passage number 150.
MR. BOEHNE. The only place I've seen anything aboutdeflation is in these articles I read in The Wall Street Journal. Ihaven't heard anybody in the business community anywhere worried aboutdeflation or giving any evidence that it's a risk that much weightneeds to be put on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, is expressing his own opinion based on the articles he has read in The Wall Street Journal. He states that he hasn't heard anyone in the business community expressing concern about deflation or providing evidence of its significant risk.


Passage number 151.
MR. CORRIGAN. Actually, the only way I can see somethinglike that in the time frame we're talking about here is if we reallyhad some kind of financial blowout--not that we haven't had somealready. I don't know how to define that, but there is very littlequestion in my mind that if something of that nature happens in thenear term on top of everything else that already has happened, thatcould precipitate a pretty nasty situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing one person's perspective on a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 152.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But even in that situation, a drop inreal output would come first and then the price deflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply explains the order in which two events would occur.


Passage number 153.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's even worse; you're right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between the speaker (Mr. Corrigan) and the person he is speaking to.


Passage number 154.
MR. PARTEE. Prices of some sensitive industrial commodities--for example, the price of gold--have been moving down. They areprobably the source of much of this, but it's hard for me to see howthat could become general.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the prices of sensitive industrial commodities, specifically mentioning the price of gold. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 155.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me make a couple of commentsthat have occurred to me in listening to all this. I could have leftthese for later, but what jumps out at me is how atypical this cycleis. Just on the face of it, we have had more rapid growth than at anytime during the postwar period--which I guess makes it atypical--though we started from a low level, to be sure. Take those domesticdemand figures, which didn't include inventories, that were presentedto us a little while ago. If you compared the domestic demand withearlier cycles, I think you would see nothing like what has been goingon in the past 20 months. And, in fact, it doesn't show much sign ofa slowdown. If you look behind it, we obviously have a budgetdeficit, as was mentioned, that is out of line with all ourexperience. It is in fact rising in the third year of expansion andthe full employment deficit, however calculated I guess, is risingrather sharply. Of course, the mirror image of that is the trade-19-7/16-17/84deficit, and however one adds it up I cannot believe such a deficit issustainable forever--however long forever is.I would like to think that there is something else atypical--but it remains to be seen--and that is that prices are moving upexceptionally slowly, given the strength of demand at this point. I'msure the dollar has something to do with that. But how much we haveingrained in the wage situation from a succession of recessions orother factors remains to be seen. I share the feeling that a numberof people have expressed that the reliability of any economic forecastin the 18 months ahead under these conditions is exceedingly limited,to say the most for it. I don't doubt that there's a lot of momentumin the economy right now; I wasn't so sure a month or so ago, but itsurely looks that way now. And I don't doubt that we're getting acontinuing thrust on fiscal policy. I must say that I don't see mucheffect from the rise in interest rates we've had and I'm not surewe're going to get it when we're in the midst of one of these periodsof considerable momentum. I was--I don't know the right word--bemused, I guess, by the analysis of the last Michigan survey thatsays the public thinks interest rates are low and one of the reasonsthey are buying is that they think rates are going to be a lot higherlater. That doesn't sound as if marginal changes in interest ratesare going to affect purchasing very much. Of course, consumerinterest rates in fact aren't doing anything, except maybe veryrecently, and I doubt that there is much there to change the behaviorvery strikingly. At the same time, all these interest rates produce alot of income on the other side of the balance sheet--on the incomestatement--that we haven't had in past expansions. We certainly needsome slowdown in my judgment, given all that's going on. In fact, Ithink we're having a test of monetary policy in deregulated marketsand it doesn't look very sensitive in terms of responses out in theeconomy. I have to say that I think a lot of the difficulty we arefacing is due to no great news on the budgetary situation. The onlypromise I can see in that area is that the budgetary situation wasn'tabsolutely written in heaven or wherever it was written, maybe theopposite place, and it conceivably could be changed--not in the nextthree months but looking beyond the next three months. I'm almostinclined to say it better be changed or we have an almost insolubleproblem. I won't berate the fact that we now have a financial systemunder pressure in every direction. I don't for a moment want tounderestimate that problem, which I think is a considerable risk onall sides in terms of looking ahead. We'll talk more about thattomorrow when we get to the short-run policy. So, with that muchcomment from here, why don't you give us your wisdom about the longrun, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement and contention in the passage. The speaker expresses skepticism about the sustainability of the budget deficit and the trade deficit. They also mention uncertainty about the wage situation and the reliability of economic forecasts. Additionally, they question the effectiveness of interest rate changes and express concerns about the financial system being under pressure. Overall, the speaker presents a critical and uncertain view of the current economic situation.


Passage number 156.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The quoted line consists of one person's statement, without any opposing views or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 157.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, thank you. I'm aware that it's 5:00p.m. and somewhat warm. But maybe we at least ought to deal with anyspecific questions that people have or go on and say something aboutthe ranges themselves. We can do so or wait until the morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging the time and weather and suggesting a course of action for addressing specific questions or discussing the ranges.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 158.
MR. BOEHNE. I have one technical question on the history ofthe 4 to 8 percent range on M1. Wasn't it at one point 4 to 9 percentand then dropped to 4 to 8 percent. It seems to me that a year or twoago there was some special reason that it was dropped to 8 percent.Do you remember that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing his belief that the range on M1 was originally 4 to 9 percent and was later dropped to 4 to 8 percent. He is asking if the other person remembers the same thing.


Passage number 159.
-20-7/16-17/84MR. AXILROD. I don't remember. Maybe Norm has the historyin front of him to see if it was. I don't remember that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not remember and suggests someone else may have the information.


Passage number 160.
MR. BERNARD. Well, at the beginning of 1983, the range forM1 was 4 to 8 percent. And then it was raised to 5 to 9 percent, butwith the base shifted to the second quarter; so it applied only forthe second half of last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing a factual explanation of the changes in M1 range during 1983. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 161.
MR. BOEHNE. And that was because of the velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 162.
MR. AXILROD. It was never 4 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 163.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were way over the 4 to 8 percent range,I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 164.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, that's right. And then it was droppedback to 4 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or agreement.


Passage number 165.
MR. WALLICH. Could I just ask the role that the midpoint ofthese ranges plays. To me, the upper end is generally the importantone. But I realize that if the staff works with the midpoint assomething to base projections on, for instance, then it makes adifference whether one also pulls down the lower end or not. That's atechnical item that I've never found the answer to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and expressing their curiosity about the role of the midpoint of the ranges.


Passage number 166.
MR. AXILROD. Well, in the earlier part of this year, thestaff generally had been working with something around the midpointfor M1 because that was what was indicated at the February meeting.As M1 began being much stronger, we interpreted "around the midpoint"as being 6-1/2 percent instead of being specifically 6 percent. Butwe would assume that it's somewhere around that midpoint at the momentunless the Committee were to say that it was expecting growth to bearound 8 percent, in which case we'd change our assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the interpretation and assumptions made by Mr. Axilrod based on the information provided.


Passage number 167.
MR. WALLICH. So, in that sense, 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent isthe same as 4 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a straightforward comparison and does not involve any conflicting perspectives or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 168.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, in terms of the midpoint. But whetherit's going to have the same effect on the markets and the policy oractual operations followed by the Committee is yet another question.At 4 to 7 percent, if M1 is running at 6-1/2 to 7 percent, I can't sayin advance whether the Committee is going to feel that more work isneeded to restrain it than if the range were 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent.That is the issue, it seems to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different possibilities and outcomes, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 169.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's going to try and get you, Henry;it's like Jello.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is an observation comparing something to Jello.


Passage number 170.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It means what the Committee says. Arethere any other technical questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is straightforward, stating that the meaning of something is determined by what the Committee says. It does not introduce any conflicting ideas or viewpoints. The following question also does not present any disagreement; it inquires if there are any additional technical questions, suggesting a factual inquiry rather than a dispute.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 171.
MR. BALLES. This is a technical observation, I guess, Mr.Chairman. If I remember your most recent testimony correctly, you atleast--and perhaps the Committee--are on record as saying that M1 isstill on probation. I would think that before this meeting is over weought to get that question settled as to whether it is or isn't. Interms of public understanding at least, the record should show whether-21-7/16-17/84we're still placing primary emphasis on M2 and M3 or whether, in fact,we're going to restore M1 to its prior position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, suggests that there may be a disagreement regarding the status of M1, with the committee potentially still considering it to be on probation while he believes it should be restored to its prior position.


Passage number 172.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We ought to put them all on probation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 173.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes, put them all on probation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a decision or suggestion to put all individuals on probation.


Passage number 174.
MR. PARTEE. Certainly, M3 ought to be on probation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Party expresses his agreement that M3 should be on probation.


Passage number 175.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Perhaps put credit on probation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement suggesting the possibility of putting credit on probation. It does not present any opposing viewpoints or disagreements.


Passage number 176.
MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] false signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The dialogue is unclear due to the unintelligible part, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions or clarifications orwhatever. I wonder if we can just do one other thing: get apreliminary view just on the 1984 ranges. Maybe it will be easy; ifnot, we won't carry it through to a conclusion. Why don't we presentit with a relatively simple option here, which is a largely cosmeticingredient. It may be more cosmetic than substantive, but I'll findthat out. Mr. Axilrod is not suggesting any change in M1 or M2. Isthat going to meet with general approval.SEVERAL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 178.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then the analysis says--whether it's rightor not is another issue--that for M3 and debt we in all likelihood aregoing to end up above the present ranges. Is that a good reason forraising them or should we keep them the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage presents a statement without any contention or disagreement. It only introduces a hypothetical analysis and raises a question about whether that analysis provides a good reason for raising the mentioned elements or keeping them the same.


Passage number 179.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Keep them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 180.
MR. BLACK. No, keep them and explain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is simply giving an instruction to keep something and provide an explanation.


Passage number 181.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree we should keep them the same.It seems to me that the fact that they are running over is not a goodreason for changing the ranges unless we're prepared to say that we'regoing to tighten policy or ease policy as a result of changing. Inother words, it's got to imply a policy change that would bemeaningful rather than a statistical adjustment just to come in withinthe range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees that the ranges should remain the same and suggests that changing them would only be justified if it implied a significant policy change, rather than just a statistical adjustment.


Passage number 182.
MR. WALLICH. It's a question of whether it's a forecast or atarget. I think of it as a target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is simply explaining his own perspective or understanding of the term in question.


Passage number 183.
MR. MARTIN. If it's a target, then that would argue forchanging the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply suggesting that if something is identified as a target, it would make sense to adjust the range.


Passage number 184.
MR. BOEHNE. I think I would argue for raising it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing his opinion and arguing for raising something, but it is not specified what he is arguing for.


Passage number 185.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage provided does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 186.
 If it's a forecast, I would say we made a badforecast, but--MR. RICE. Well, the target is the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that the forecast made was bad, but Mr. Rice seems to argue that the target is the forecast.


Passage number 187.
MR. PARTEE. A target is the desired number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 188.
-22-7/16-17/84MR. MORRIS. The problem with raising the upper limit fordebt is that we would be saying implicitly that we think a 12 percentrate of growth for debt is acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a problem with raising the upper limit for debt.


Passage number 189.
MR. MARTIN. Given the acquisitions, mergers, and leveragedbuyout situation, I would argue that it is acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion about the acceptability of a situation, but there is no explicit mention of conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 190.
MR. BOEHNE. So would I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage about Mr. Guffey.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 192.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would leave the Ml,M2, and M3 ranges the same, but I would argue for increasing the debtrange at this time to 9 to 12 percent. It's not so much to make theargument for 1984, but I'd like to move on to 1983 and be able toreduce that in 1983 back to 8 to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Guffey is suggesting increasing the debt range from 8 to 11 percent to 9 to 12 percent. This indicates a disagreement or contention as it implies that there may be differing opinions on the appropriate debt range for the given time period.


Passage number 193.
MR. BLACK. You mean 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a statement by Mr. Black.


Passage number 194.
MR. GUFFEY. Pardon me, I mean 1985. I'd like to increase itin the last half of 1984 to 9 to 12 percent with the anticipation ofshowing a reduction for 1985 back to an 8 to 11 percent range. It'smore consistent. It is only a monitoring aggregate at the moment, andwe have had very little experience in this Committee with using thedebt aggregate. It seems quite logical to me that the Chairman canpresent the picture that with the merger situation there areuncertainties as to what the debt aggregate really means. Becausewe're still monitoring it, one could make the case for increasing itnow and dropping it in 1985--carrying through the idea of continuingto move down on all of the aggregates for 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own opinion and logic regarding the debt aggregate, without contradicting or opposing any other ideas or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 195.
MR. PARTEE. Roger, wouldn't we have to raise M3 too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage suggests there is disagreement or contention as Mr. Partee questions whether M3 needs to be raised. This implies that someone else in the conversation may have a different opinion or viewpoint on the matter.


Passage number 196.
MR. GUFFEY. No, I think not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a personal opinion, but there is no evidence of disagreement or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 197.
MR. PARTEE. Because that's how they finance the creditnumbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the way credit numbers are financed.


Passage number 198.
MR. GUFFEY. Yes, I understand that. But I would prefer,simply because we've had more experience with M3 and consistently havebeen over that targeted range in past years, to leave it as it is.Because if we raise both of them, it seems to suggest to me that wehave indeed turned the reins loose a bit and I would not want to givethat view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 199.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's funny, but I come to theopposite conclusion. It seems to me that if we raise the target forcredit, we are implying to the markets that we're going to be somewhateasier in our policy than if we don't raise the target. It seems tome that there has to be a policy implication to making a midyearadjustment. You don't read it that way, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their own interpretation and acknowledging that the listener may have a different perspective.


Passage number 200.
MR. GUFFEY. Tony, I would just rebut that by saying it's amonitoring range now that we've had very little experience with. Weelevated M1 at the last meeting to a higher position, equal to M2 andM3. And we have not elevated the debt aggregate to that position. Asa result, if we're still experimenting with it, let's experiment withit by raising it to be somewhat more consistent, with the thought of-23-7/16-17/84dropping it in the '85 presentment that the Chairman will make at thesame time he talks about '84.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 201.
MR. CORRIGAN. I'd go one step further even than Tony. I'dbe troubled by raising that credit range, particularly on the groundsof raising it because of mergers and leveraged buyouts. It seems tome that that's tantamount to sanctioning a pattern of financialbehavior that is going to get us in trouble sooner or later. If we'regoing to raise it, raise it. But I would not say that we're going toraise it because we have all these damned leveraged buyouts. Thatseems to me to be just bad policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, expresses disagreement with the idea of raising the credit range based on mergers and leveraged buyouts. He argues that it would be bad policy to sanction such financial behavior and suggests that if the credit range is to be raised, it should be done without taking these factors into consideration.


Passage number 202.
MR. GUFFEY. It's simply a recognition of what has happenedover the first 6 months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement without any signs of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 203.
MR. PARTEE. I agree with Jerry on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they agree with Jerry, indicating harmony or consensus between the two individuals.


Passage number 204.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we may not want to debate this atthis time of night. My own inclination is to keep them the same andsay that we expect that we're going to come out above these ranges butwe're not too happy about it and that's why we're not changing them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions their own inclination to keep something the same and expresses some dissatisfaction with the current situation, but there is no clear disagreement or conflicting views presented.


Passage number 205.
MR. ROBERTS. We monitor it and see if it leads us tosomething we can do or control as against something we look at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they monitor something and assess whether it leads them to actions they can take or control, as opposed to just observing it.


Passage number 206.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We think they're higher than they shouldbe for the long run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states a subjective opinion about something being "higher than they should be for the long run." While it is a statement of the author's belief, there is no indication of contention or disagreement with any opposing views.


Passage number 207.
MR. MORRIS. That says it's desirable in this year to havesomething that's running above the range, it seems to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is expressing his opinion without any conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 208.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage needs to be provided for analysis.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what it means if we raise it.If we raise it a little, we're probably saying we better darn well getwithin it. I don't know how people will interpret that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It simply expresses uncertainty and lack of knowledge about the meaning and interpretation of raising something.


Passage number 210.
MR. BOEHNE. A lot depends on the context and what we do fornext year. It seems perfectly reasonable to me to say that we aren'tgoing to tighten policy because of a lot of churning of funds relatingto mergers. I would think we'd gain some credibility with that. Italso would indicate that once these things are fixed they aren't fixedin cement and that we do adjust them to unfolding circumstances. Ifwe then lowered the ranges for next year, that would minimize the riskof concerns that we're throwing away the discipline. To adjust wouldshow more realism. Now, one can get at it the way you suggested, bysaying: "Here they are, but we're going to go over them." It seems tome it's two ways to skin the same cat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing one person's perspective and suggestion.


Passage number 211.
MR. PARTEE. Well, if I understand it, we're over them evenwithout the leveraged buyouts, but not so much. And it seems to methat we might just say we are running over and to a considerableextent it is due to the leveraged buyouts and the mergers and soforth. We expect this damn fool nonsense to stop and, therefore, wehaven't raised the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Partee, seems to agree with the statement that they are "over them even without the leveraged buyouts" and that "it is due to the leveraged buyouts and the mergers and so forth." He expresses frustration and hopes for the "nonsense" to stop, indicating that he agrees with the notion that leveraged buyouts and mergers are contributing to the problem.


Passage number 212.
-24-7/16-17/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is simply a statement with a numerical expression.


Passage number 213.
 Particularly since Frank Morris hasassured us that this is the one target that we did come in within therange up until the time we monitored--MR. MORRIS. It still is. It's the only aggregate thatpredicted a 12 percent rate of growth in nominal GNP in the firsthalf. Certainly, M1 didn't and M2 didn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the performance of different aggregates in predicting a growth rate in the nominal GNP.


Passage number 214.
MR. GRAMLEY. May I talk a bit about what I think this creditvariable is supposed to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention as it simply asks for permission to discuss a specific topic.


Passage number 215.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Predicted or accompanied.SPEAKER(.). Yes, what is this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 216.
MR. MORRIS. In other words, if you were to have predicted anominal GNP of 12 percent, you wouldn't be surprised to see a 13percent rate of growth in total debt. That would be fairly in linewith past experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement based on past experience and suggesting that a 13 percent rate of growth in total debt would be consistent with their prediction of a 12 percent nominal GNP growth.


Passage number 217.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would have thought the way we were supposedto use a variable like this--a monitoring variable that we're nottargeting on--is as a variable that gives us some information aboutthe adequacy of the monetary targets we set in the first place. M3very much falls into that same category also. If we set ranges, say,of 4 to 8 percent for M1 and 6 to 9 for M2, and we think we're doingpretty well in those and get these gigantic increases in M3 and incredit, what we really ought to do is to lower our targets for M1 andM2. That's the logical thing to do. To go to the conclusion thatwhat we should do is increase the target for the credit variablebecause we didn't anticipate it right is totally the wrong thing todo. If we're not gutsy enough to follow the logic to its conclusion,which is to pull the growth rates of M1 and M2 down--and I'm not goingto suggest that we do that--at least let's hold to the targets for M3and debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Gramley explaining his perspective on how to use a monitoring variable and adjust targets accordingly.


Passage number 218.
MR. BOEHNE. It's getting time for cocktails, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply stating that it is almost time for cocktails, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 219.
MR. MORRIS. But it does tell us that the monetary policy inthe first half of '84 has been much more expansionary than M1 or M2would indicate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the monetary policy in the first half of '84.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, we provided a lot more credit than weshould have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention regarding the amount of credit that was provided. The phrase "a lot more credit than we should have" implies that there is a difference of opinion on what the appropriate level of credit should have been.


Passage number 221.
MR. BOEHNE. Even though there are some distorting financialfactors out there in merger actions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is simply stating a fact about financial factors in merger actions.


Passage number 222.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, but if you take out the 1 percent or sofor mergers, we still end up well above the upper limit of the rangefor the first two quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of fact, presenting a numerical analysis.


Passage number 223.
MR. MARTIN. But the 1 percent is a very feeble measure ofthe volume of leveraged buyouts, mergers, and acquisitions. It onlymeasures the very biggest ones. And this phenomenon is happeningthroughout the industrial complex and the services [industry].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating a fact about the limitations of using the 1 percent as a measure for leveraged buyouts, mergers, and acquisitions. It is not expressing any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 224.
MR. PARTEE. That's not how I understand it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It simply states an individual's understanding, without any opposing view or conflicting perspective mentioned.


Passage number 225.
-25-7/16-17/84 -26-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand the way they measure it,that is not the way they get the number. They say they get the numberby the amount the stock was reduced. [Unintelligible] statistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker seems to be expressing their understanding or interpretation of how a number is obtained, but there is no direct contradiction or conflict presented.


Passage number 226.
MR. MARTIN. It's not enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Martin without any conflicting views or opposing opinions being expressed.


Passage number 227.
MR. PRELL. Well, we tried to calculate every merger and makeallowance for those that we can't itemize. So we really do think itis our best guess of the total. It could be short; that's clearbecause there's so much that is below the surface.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 228.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I won't pursue it any further.Let's dispose of this first thing in the morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 229.
[Meeting recessed]7/16-17/84July 17--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I had a little research done overnight ona couple of factual points that arose yesterday. Let me just reportthe results of my research. Nonperforming loans of the big banks havebeen going up rather regularly--through March, anyway. They were 3.8percent compared to 3.5 percent at the end of last year. From veryincomplete reports that we have so far, my impression is that theyhave taken another jump in the second quarter. Mr. Boehne raised thequestion of impressions about wages--and I think we all have beensurprised at the low level of the figures--and whether the figures areright. We went back and looked at wage settlements that have beenreported so far this year and it's a rather interesting story. Let meread the list, which begins in January and goes more or less to date:Commercial builders in New York City in January--a big settlement,no cola, but 6-3/4 percent;Teamsters/Motor Express--minus 15 percent;Oil refineries, the first big settlement of the year--l-1/2percent, no cola;Highway contractors in Pennsylvania--0 to 2-1/4 percent;Container industries, 17,000 production workers at the four largestcompanies--0;Fieldcrest Mills clothing--5.5 percent, no cola;Honeywell office machines--0, no cola;Minneapolis hospitals -- 4 percent, no cola;United Airlines flight attendants--6 percent increase over threeyears and they get it right away;Dow Jones & Co.--not, I think, terribly affected by businessconditions--7-1/2 percent, a big one;Los Angeles hospitals--5 percent;Western Coal Mines, United Mine Workers, 10,000 people--2 percent,no cola;Hawaii hotels--4 percent, no cola;Southern California Gas--6 percent, no cola;Frontier Airlines--minus 11 percent;New Jersey building contractors, unlike New York--3 percent, nocola;Northwest Airlines flight attendants--6 percent, lower for newhires;Public Service Elec. & Gas, New Jersey--5-1/4 percent, but withlower pay for new hires;McDonnell Douglas Aircraft, 9,600 workers--0;Chain Food Stores, New York & New Jersey--5 percent, lower pay fornew hires;Pipeline contracts nationwide agreement in June, 45,000 workers--0;Houston Power Co., a utility--3 percent, no cola in the first year;Cargo and Tanker operators, National Maritime Union, 20,000workers--0, no cola;Chicago area contractors, 45,000 workers--0 to 2 percent, no cola;Niagara Power Corp., 8000 utility workers--5-1/4 percent, no cola;United Airlines, mechanics and ground crews--4-1/2 percent, lowerpay for new hires, no cola.What is BNA. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply reporting the results of their research on nonperforming loans and wage settlements.


Passage number 230.
MR. KICHLINE. Bureau of National Affairs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only states the name "Mr. Kichline" followed by the organization he belongs to, the Bureau of National Affairs.


Passage number 231.
-27-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A private outfit. I guess they updatethis and do some summary of wage agreements. For all industries themedian first-year wage increase negotiated to date in 1984 is 2.8percent, compared to 5 percent last year. From the report of thecomparability survey of the government, average salaries among whitecollar workers increased between 3 and 6 percent over the year endingin March 1984, the lowest rate of increase in more than 10 years.That is the government's pay comparability survey. So, I think thereis some comfort that what we see reported in average weekly earningsis not off the wall. We have some big agreements coming along and Ionly have the vaguest impression of them. The Post Office [workers]are in negotiation now and I understand there's some prospect of verylittle or no increase. As for mine workers, I don't know but Isuspect they're far apart. There is another big one apart from theauto workers coming along. What am I forgetting about here, Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states information and the speaker's thoughts without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 232.
MR. CORRIGAN. Coal miners.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply mentions coal miners without any opposing opinions or conflicting statements.


Passage number 233.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Coal miners I just mentioned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Coal miners I just mentioned" does not indicate any kind of contention or disagreement. It is simply referring back to a group of coal miners that were mentioned earlier in the passage.


Passage number 234.
MR. MARTIN. Construction union.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement introducing the topic of construction unions.


Passage number 235.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The automobile one is coming, and we knowthat's a big, dangerous one. I thought there was one other. Thepostal workers are very big as are the mine workers and [thosenegotiations] going on right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any explicit contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses different workers and negotiations without expressing conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 236.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You'd expect very little, if any,wage increase in the depressed industries. What explains the erraticpattern that in some nondepressed industries the increases are stillextremely low, whereas in others--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that in depressed industries, little to no wage increase is expected, and in non-depressed industries, the increases can vary.


Passage number 237.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's very clear that we're gettinglow settlements in some of the deregulated industries. There are twoindustries in particular: the airlines, which came up here again andagain; and the construction workers, for which these aggregate figuresshow practically no increase in wages. The explanation I hear aboutthat, despite very large increases in construction activity shown inthese charts, is the threat of non-unionized workers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing a clear observation and explanation about low settlements in certain industries. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 238.
MR. MARTIN. Not only the threat, but the utilization bydevelopers of non-union workers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of non-union workers by developers may be a point of disagreement or contention between different parties, such as labor unions and developers.


Passage number 239.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, in New York, they got [6-3/4]percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a fact about the tax rate in New York without expressing any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 240.
MR. GUFFEY. Did I understand that most of these are one-yearcontracts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The statement simply relays information without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 241.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, no. I think a lot of them are two-year contracts and this gives the first year. There was a variety,but I think these numbers were for the first year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply provides an explanation of the contracts and the numbers associated with them.


Passage number 242.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There seems to be a qualitativedifference in the psychology in the country in that for the secondyear of a recovery people are being much more careful about wageincreases. One can either attribute that to the greater intensity ofthe recession than some earlier recessions or to some feeling that-28-7/16-17/84they can't pass on these wages as easily in price increases. I don'tknow if there is any other explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 243.
MR. MARTIN. Or the competition that you mentioned yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the use of the word "competition," which suggests a potential conflict or disagreement regarding a certain topic or issue.


Passage number 244.
MR. RICE. Strike behavior has been very favorable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that strike behavior has been very favorable, which suggests that there is no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 245.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me raise another question while Ithink of it and we can return to it. These price estimates thateverybody has given bother me a bit, partly because I'm not sure weshould be in the public posture of saying our monetary policy isineffective in keeping prices under control. It became very clearyesterday that you have a variety of assumptions about the dollar andI have no doubt that over a period of time--I don't know about nextyear--that can be a big influence, [particularly] if the dollar reallyfell out of bed. I wonder whether it would make some sense to have astandardized assumption on the dollar and do all these projections onthe assumption that the dollar isn't going to be changedsubstantially, which would encompass a depreciation of 5 percent plusmaybe, but not, I think, 15 to 20 percent. We could present the priceforecast that way and say quite clearly in the material that theseprice forecasts are made on a standardized assumption that the dollaris not going to change very substantially and that if the dollar doesdecline substantially, everyone would be raising his inflationforecast appreciably. That would get us out of this business ofevaluating different assumptions about the dollar, where I take itthere is a good deal of uncertainty about the timing of any declineanyway, although there is a good deal of feeling that the dollar mightdecline, as I well understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the price estimates and suggests using a standardized assumption about the dollar for projections. This is evident in phrases like "bother me a bit," "I wonder whether," "I think," and "I take it there is a good deal of uncertainty."


Passage number 246.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But there is still a difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that a difference exists without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 247.
 Wedid that, as I mentioned, and we still came up--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're still going to have somedifferences; having differences doesn't particularly bother me. Ithink a certain dispersion of the estimates may even be helpful. Iunderstand the overall level if one is assuming declines in thedollar. But I think that is a separable and an unknown factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges differences in estimates but states that it does not bother them and may even be helpful. They express understanding of the overall level but mention that the impact of assuming declines in the dollar is a separate and unknown factor. Overall, there is no strong disagreement or conflict present in the passage.


Passage number 248.
MR. WALLICH. It concerns me that this injects a degree ofoptimism, not to say euphoria, into the approach that could misleadanyone who forgets the assumption. One really then always has to makeanother 1/2 or 1 percent adjustment to one's inflation expectation inorder to be reasonably realistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the possibility of spreading excessive optimism, suggesting that one needs to further adjust their inflation expectations to be realistic.


Passage number 249.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you assume the dollar is going down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario of the dollar going down without any conflicting opinions or debates.


Passage number 250.
MR. WALLICH. Well, if it isn't, then one can say onedeserves the dividend and bonus and perhaps one has missed a littlebit of growth as a result of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is offering a conditional statement and discussing potential outcomes. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 251.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We missed by about 1 percent this year, itlooks like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply states a fact without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 252.
MR. MARTIN. A million jobs. The coal miners. Nothingsignificant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are a million jobs, specifically referencing coal miners. The statement "nothing significant" could imply that the speaker does not consider this information to be of great importance, but it does not indicate a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 253.
MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation:
Since the passage is marked as "unintelligible," it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 254.
]-29-7/16-17/84MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we had a little trouble with the[draft] wording of the continuation of the credit and policy stance,or whatever it was. I can't find it right now. But after we havevoted on our long-run target ranges, I think this might bring us alittle closer together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions a little trouble with the wording of something, but they don't express any strong disagreement or contention with anyone else. They suggest that voting on long-run target ranges might bring them closer together, indicating a desire for unity rather than conflict.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You all ought to have a chance to redoyour forecast and I was planning that in the ordinary course ofevents. You may make any re-evaluation you want after the meeting andafter any decisions we make. I'm raising the additional questions:Do we want to standardize the assumption on the dollar and, if we wantto standardize that, how do we do it. I find it a little difficult tostandardize it if [our report] says the Open Market Committee isunanimously expecting a big decline in the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 256.
 I just don't thinkthat--MR. GRAMLEY. Another aspect we have to think about is thatif we have a standardized, very small decline in the dollar, that isgoing to touch not only the price forecast but also the real growthforecast. And it begins to look perhaps a bit artificial.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers are expressing their thoughts and considerations about a specific topic without conflicting with each other.


Passage number 257.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know how much it wouldaffect people's growth forecasts during this particular time period.I guess nobody is assuming any budgetary action next year. I'm notsure that's a good assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and questioning the assumption being made, but there is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 258.
MS. HORN. We were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: unable to reach a consensus on the issue.


Passage number 259.
MR. PARTEE. Not enough to affect my numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee states that there is not enough to affect his numbers, indicating that there is no disagreement.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't exclude the possibility. Idon't see any way out of the box. I wouldn't bet a lot on it, butthere is a chance of their going after the budget after the election.I would not like to presume that that's impossible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Rather, it expresses a cautious possibility and an acknowledgement of uncertainty.


Passage number 261.
MR. MARTIN. It may be politically very attractive to goafter the budget after the election.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin suggests that going after the budget after the election may be politically attractive, indicating a potential course of action.


Passage number 262.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And come up with a mini-result.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is necessary to have the exact passage to provide a mini-result.


Passage number 263.
MR. MARTIN. It's the going after it; it's the form, not thesubstance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Martin, expressing his opinion about the importance of the form rather than the substance.


Passage number 264.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They'll go after it, no question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "They'll go after it, no question" suggests a strong belief that the individuals mentioned will pursue the task without any doubt or hesitation.


Passage number 265.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I mean an official program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the phrase "Well, I mean an official program" without any conflicting opinions or opposing ideas.


Passage number 266.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Treasury is considering varioustax proposals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the Treasury is considering various tax proposals, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply conveys the fact that multiple tax proposals are being considered.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that is going to materializein anything in 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing an opinion about a future event without any contradictory information or opposing views.


Passage number 268.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. With that same assumption we came upwith a 2.9 percent real growth forecast for '85. That's not toodifferent from the staff's, with their 15 percent [dollar] decline. Idon't know why we come out so closely to the staff on both inflation-30-7/16-17/84and real growth when we don't have that dollar decline that they have.I haven't analyzed it. Dick [Davis], do you know the reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement of different forecasts and a questioning of the reasons behind the similarities in the predictions.


Passage number 269.
MR. DAVIS. We are essentially [unintelligible] net exports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that "We are essentially [unintelligible] net exports," without expressing any disagreement with others or initiating a debate.


Passage number 270.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any information about any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 271.
 Stronger somewhere else--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions. It simply states that someone or something is stronger somewhere else without providing any opposing views.


Passage number 272.
 That's consistent with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can substantially overdo ourability to make any of these forecasts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating a fact about the limits of making accurate forecasts.


Passage number 273.
MR. MARTIN. That would be the reason I would support yoursuggestion of a standardized assumption, whatever the percentage is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with someone else's suggestion and indicating their support for it.


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me return to that question later on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating they will address a specific question at a later time.


Passage number 275.
MR. WALLICH. Let me mention something. This technique of nochange in the exchange rates is one that the OECD has adopted [andfollowed] for many years as a result of a resolution. It is beingquestioned increasingly because it leads to conflicts with respect toprojections made by the countries themselves, which contain all kindsof assumptions about their exchange rates. The same is true withrespect to monetary policy. They are not allowed to make anassumption that their monetary policy--that is, budget policy--wouldbe changed, whereas the countries that put in their projections havemade whatever assumption they want to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining a technique that the OECD has adopted and the potential conflicts that arise from it. The speaker is simply providing information without expressing a personal opinion or engaging in any disagreement.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how I would interpret that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the speaker is uncertain about their interpretation of something. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 277.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I think we are moving in the directionthat the OECD now is considering abandoning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Wallich without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 278.
MR. MARTIN. But why did the OECD take the position in thefirst place, Henry, unless there had been some good and compellingreasons to get them to square one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification about the reasons behind the OECD's position.


Passage number 279.
MR. WALLICH. It made countries angry to have their policiespreempted, so to speak, by suggestion of the OECD Secretariat. Itlooked like implicit policy advice. So to do it that way was theneutral and simple thing to do. I'm not sure what the IMF does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply providing their perspective on why the OECD Secretariat's approach may have caused anger among countries. They also express uncertainty about the role of the IMF.


Passage number 280.
MR. TRUMAN. They do the same thing, Henry. Of course, theAdministration also does it, but for reasons on the political [side].They do it for reasons of sensitivity--the same reason the Chairmancited, if I may put it that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Truman and the Chairman seem to agree that the Administration and the other party do something for similar reasons.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 281.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Doesn't it get a little embarrassing,Paul, if you're asked by the [Congressional] Committee about thereasons for the wide spectrum [of views] among the members of theFOMC. If you said that some of them assumed a 15 percent [dollar]decline and some of them didn't assume that, is that going to look alittle strange up there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker is questioning whether it would be embarrassing and strange if different members of the FOMC have different views on the dollar decline.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it doesn't make me too happy. I'mnot sure I've thought this all through, but I think I would rather saythat it's based upon an assumption that may or may not be right thatthe dollar is unchanged or that if it does change, as everybody thinks-31-7/16-17/84[is likely], there is a substantial danger that one would have to add1 percent or so to these figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 283.
MR. WALLICH. After all, what is the mental process by whichwe ourselves arrive at these numbers. I would say there is a fairchance that the dollar will decline. I don't know by how much and Idon't know how great the probability is. I pushed my numbers a littlein the direction that reflects this possibility. It's all a matter ofprobabilities and of having some ranges in mind, but I don't have afixed assumption that the dollar will or will not depreciate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their own thought process and acknowledging that they do not have a fixed assumption about the depreciation or appreciation of the dollar.


Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My main conclusion is that not too muchweight should be put on these economic forecasts, but people look atthem; they didn't look at them all that much in the past. I think thestaff had an assumption of a big decline in the dollar a year ago; infact, that may help explain why the inflation picture is better. Itdoesn't explain why the economy is doing a lot better than the staffprojected a year ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and analyzing the staff's assumptions, but there is no conflicting viewpoint stated.


Passage number 285.
MR. TRUMAN. I was just doing some calculations this morning,Mr. Chairman, which indicate that the dollar in June was only 8percent above its peak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a factual observation made by Mr. Truman without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information mentioned.


Passage number 286.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 8 percent above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given phrase "It's 8 percent above" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or measurement without expressing any conflicting opinions or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 287.
MR. TRUMAN. It's 8 percent above where it was in November of1982, which in the way these things go I'm not sure is much of anappreciation anyhow. It happens that November '82 was the peak; itwas the trough of the recession. Recently it hit another peak but thepeaks have not been that far apart. It has been more level, I think,over the period despite [unintelligible], in part buoyed by the risein interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of facts and observations about the appreciation of something over a certain time period.


Passage number 288.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way the dollar bounces up and down, Ithink a decrease of 10 percent may be insignificant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not involve any kind of contention or disagreement. It is the speaker's personal opinion about the potential significance of a 10 percent decrease in the value of the dollar.


Passage number 289.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One sees these things in hindsight.If we had waited 10 years, we wouldn't have had to float the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 290.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me return to picking out thesetargets. On 1984, I'll make another attempt to see whether we candispose of it relatively quickly. When I said no change yesterday, Ithought I noted some oral acclamation. I may have been wrong aboutthat because people began saying they disagreed. But let me just trysomething out to see whether we can [agree] without spending a lot oftime on this. Suppose we keep them the same with a very clear caveatthat we're keeping M3 and debt the same and expect to come in over theranges for them but are not too happy about that. Is that the bestway to present these. The alternative, obviously, is to increase theM3 and debt ranges. Among Committee members, is that the desirablecourse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that people began saying they disagreed, indicating a difference in opinions or perspectives on the matter being discussed.


Passage number 291.
MR. WALLICH. I would like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich simply expresses his desire for something without expressing any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 292.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Apparently a couple of people think that'snot the desirable course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that a couple of people have a different opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 293.
-32-7/16-17/84MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, it is just a matter of emphasis.It would seem to me that in the presentation we shouldn't couple theimportance of M3 and debt. We are learning something about whatinformation the debt numbers will give us. My only footnote to thatto join the raised hands would be that we differentiate between thetwo aggregates. M3 is more important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin disagrees with coupling the importance of M3 and debt and suggests differentiating between the two aggregates.


Passage number 294.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The debt range is awfully high. It seemsto me inconsistent with any--. Mr. Prell gave me a figure after themeeting yesterday, but I don't know whether it made me feel better ornot. If I understood it correctly, the trouble here is knowing whatthe base is. If you took net issuance of debt and equity this yearand used as a base debt outstanding plus the market value of equity,which is a big question, the rate of growth would be about 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides a factual description of the debt range and the author's uncertainty about its implications. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 295.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, my preference would be to do thealternative, but I can accept the approach that you suggest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne states his preference but also indicates that he can accept the alternative approach suggested by someone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anybody else who feels that way.My problem with the alternative--and I think we could do it eitherway--is that if we raise them we really have to say we're going to tryto meet them. And then there's the question of how far to raise them.I think the worst of all worlds is raising them and then saying we'regoing to go over them anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention regarding the issue of raising certain unknown entities. The phrase "My problem with the alternative" implies a disagreement with the proposed alternative, and the questioning tone in "Is there anybody else who feels that way" further implies a potential disagreement among the individuals involved in the conversation.


Passage number 297.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual text. Please provide the relevant passage for a proper analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 298.
 And we are so uncertain about the merger/acquisition/LBO component of debt that I don't see how we could--MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think that is a good argument. It maybe best to say "Here they are" and then say "Hell, we don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially expresses uncertainty about the merger/acquisition/LBO component of debt. Mr. BOEHNE acknowledges this uncertainty and agrees that it may be best to admit not knowing the answer.


Passage number 299.
"MR. BLACK. Leave out the interjection in the testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a plain statement expressing a request to leave out a certain interjection in the testimony.


Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's tentatively assume that's what we'regoing to do then, and return to the '85 targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that they will tentatively assume a certain course of action and then return to the targets from 1985.


Passage number 301.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If you put a lot of emphasis on themergers and the LBOs, you're going to be asked to send out a letterasking the bankers not to finance that activity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that if someone puts emphasis on mergers and LBOs, they will be asked to send out a letter asking bankers not to finance that activity.


Passage number 302.
MR. MARTIN. We already sent out a caution on the LBOs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is simply stating that a caution has already been sent out on the LBOs.


Passage number 303.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may not be the worst thing in the worldto send one out. For 1985 the proposals here, which we don't have tolimit ourselves to, range from no change to partial change to reducingthem by roughly a half point. I will entertain any comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The author is open to considering different proposals and is willing to listen to any comments.


Passage number 304.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The whole thing boils down, ofcourse, to the forecast on the velocity of circulation. I gather fromthis that Steve is projecting that in a year in which we don't havesubstantial price increases, the long-term average [growth rate ofthe] velocity of circulation for M1 is 2. Is that correct. And youare not talking about seeing relatively modest interest rate increasesnext year; you're talking about substantial--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply seeking clarification on the forecast of the velocity of circulation and interest rate increases.


Passage number 305.
MR. AXILROD. In the projection we have very modest interestrate increases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 306.
-33-7/16-17/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If he's really right that the long-term average [growth rate] is 2--and I don't have a view on that, Ijust assume that he's correct--then it seems to me that we probablyshould confine the M1 growth rate to 4 to 7 percent or else we mightpump in too much money. On the other hand, my instinct is maybe to godown only a half point in this midyear preliminary proposal in orderto preserve room in February of next year to go down all the way to 4to 7 if that still looks [appropriate]. That's because it would bemuch harder to move up a half point if we go to 4 to 7 percent now;then it's going to look bad to retreat by that half point. So, eventhough I think there is an intellectual case at the moment for 4 to 7percent, tactically I think we would be better off moving cautiouslynow and if the situation is still the same in February of next year,going all the way to 4 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and considerations on the appropriate M1 growth rate, without any mention or consideration of opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 307.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just observe, along the lines ofyour concerns about velocity, that something like 4 to 7 percent orwhatever number you pick looks pretty good compared to the staff'snominal GNP forecast. Yesterday [we noted that] the staff's nominalGNP is below everybody else's except for one; quite a few of thenominal GNP forecasts are around 9 percent and some are as high asalmost 11 percent, which raises the greater question of consistency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is pointing out that the staff's nominal GNP forecast is lower than everyone else's, which raises a question of consistency. This implies that there is disagreement or contention among the forecasts.


Passage number 308.
MR. PARTEE. Well, the question is whether we want to have 11percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the question of whether or not to have 11 percent.


Passage number 309.
MR. GRAMLEY. Not only that but if you had a stronger GNPforecast and more price inflation, then you probably would be talkingabout increases in nominal interest rates, in which case you're nolonger confined to the projection of velocity that assumes thatinterest rates are unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of hypothetical scenarios and their implications.


Passage number 310.
MR. PARTEE. It seems to me that we ought to be thinking ofnominal GNP of 8 percent as about right next year. And we ought tohave money numbers more consistent with GNP around 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 311.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, 8 to 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply states a numerical percentage.


Passage number 312.
MR. PARTEE. Yes. Let's say 3 percent real and 5 percent onprices or 3-1/2 percent real and 4-1/2 percent prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting two different options or scenarios without expressing any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 313.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's fine with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement or acceptance with a previous statement or proposal.


Passage number 314.
 I just hopethe forecast--MR. PARTEE. I hope we are right. That's an indicator ofpossible difficulty if the forecast is higher than that because itmeans higher rates and all that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing hope that the forecast is correct and stating that a higher forecast could indicate potential difficulties such as higher rates. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 315.
MR. MARTIN. It means we would adjust the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that something would be adjusted without any opposing views or conflicting opinions presented.


Passage number 316.
MR. PARTEE. Or let [interest] rates go up because we don'twant that much GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that higher interest rates could be a solution to avoid excessive growth in Gross National Product (GNP). However, without further context, it is difficult to determine if this idea is supported or disputed by others.


Passage number 317.
MR. MARTIN. Or don't want that much inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 318.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But your point, Chuck, then alsotends to work in the direction of concluding that a 4 to 7 percentrange makes sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges and agrees with Chuck's point.


Passage number 319.
7/16-17/84MR. PARTEE. I think I would agree with that. But I alsoagree with the other thing you said. I don't know if it's possible topreserve any freedom, but if we can preserve any freedom, we ought totry to do it for early next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with two statements, indicating a lack of disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
MR. MARTIN. With velocity growth moving from 2-1/2 to 4-1/2to a presumed 2 or [a little less than] 2, we better leave some degreeof freedom, by going to 7-1/2 percent rather than 7 percent for a top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The disagreement arises from the choice of whether to go with a 7-1/2 percent or 7 percent top for an unspecified variable. The use of "better" suggests that there is a difference of opinion on which option is more appropriate.


Passage number 321.
MR. WALLICH. Well, historically, I think we have made thesemoves at midyear. That is, we have changed the ranges at midyear andthen confirmed them in February. I could visualize the marketwatching us and saying "Well, they've decided not to continue [to movethe ranges] downward." I think this could send a wrong message.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their perspective or opinion on the potential message that could be perceived by the market based on a historical pattern of making changes to ranges at midyear.


Passage number 322.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, no. We still would be movingthem downward; I'm talking about at least 1/2 point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply clarifying their statement and restating their point.


Passage number 323.
MR. WALLICH. Oh, you do want to go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich expresses a willingness to go down.


Passage number 324.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 325.
MR. PARTEE. Instead of saying alternative II at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting an alternative approach.


Passage number 326.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would move down a half point nowand then if the substantive case is still solid in February I'd move[down] another 1/2 point. After last year we made some significantrevisions between the preliminary targets adopted in July and thoseadopted later, in February. It would be a little embarrassing,though, to move a full point now and then, if we felt we had toretreat, move up 1/2 point. That's why I'm suggesting this othersequence. You're shaking your head skeptically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a different sequence of moves and the person they are speaking to is shaking their head skeptically, indicating a mild disagreement or disbelief.


Passage number 327.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm just trying to imagine thecircumstances. I don't think it's so hard moving [the ranges] up ifthe economy isn't doing well. It depends on all the circumstances.If inflation is doing well and we get no increase in velocity, wewould say we're getting no increase in velocity and move up. That's avery favorable circumstance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and considerations about a hypothetical situation, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 328.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Suppose inflation isn't doing wellbut you can't be as tight in your monetary policy for internationalreasons or whatever. Then that's not so good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply presents a hypothetical scenario where inflation is not doing well and tight monetary policy cannot be implemented due to international reasons. The statement "Then that's not so good" reflects a subjective opinion, but it does not indicate a direct disagreement or contention between multiple parties.


Passage number 329.
MR. GRAMLEY. Then you leave the targets where they are and[let growth] run over them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a plan of action, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 330.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's the alternative--runningover a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a personal opinion.


Passage number 331.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think we mainly have to ask ourselves whatsort of message we want to convey now with the targets for 1985. Inthis connection, we ought to be thinking about what we're going to dowith the others before we decide what we're going to do with M1. Myguess would be that one would have a pretty hard time arguing for areduction in the target ranges for any of the other aggregates. M3and credit probably are going to end up way over the upper end of therange [this year]. If we can get back down into the range for 1985,-35-7/16-17/84we will be doing well. For M2, there's a case [to be made] that itscurrent behavior will persist, but the current behavior is reallyvery, very odd relative to historical trends. Normally speaking, wedon't expect to see much velocity increase for M2 over time. So, Iwould argue that we'd be better off now to play it safe and leave theranges for M2, M3 and domestic nonfinancial debt where they are. Thenthat would argue, if we want to do something that conveys a message,for dropping off a percentage point from the top of the M1 range andbeing ready to go back up if the circumstances strongly recommend thatin February.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their thoughts and opinions on the targets for different aggregates but does not express disagreement with any other perspective.


Passage number 332.
MR. MARTIN. I think the limitations on that kind of policywould be the emphasis we would then be putting on M1. If we singlethat aggregate out and reduce that one, that's the signal to watch M1for a signal of our policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is simply stating his opinion and discussing the potential limitations of a specific policy.


Passage number 333.
MR. GRAMLEY. We could color that by noting that we've beenlooking at a range for M1 that was 1 percentage point wider than thosefor the other aggregates and now that the velocity of M1 is beginningto behave along a more normal cyclical pattern we changed the width ofthe range to 3 percentage points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact and explaining the rationale behind a specific decision.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 334.
MR. MARTIN. Is it beginning to behave or are we assumingthat it may behave in a more normal cyclical pattern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement or contention in the passage. This is because there is a contrast between the idea of the behavior of something improving (beginning to behave) and the uncertainty of that improvement (assuming that it may behave in a more normal cyclical pattern).


Passage number 335.
MR. PARTEE. It's been all right for a couple of quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that things have been "all right" for a couple of quarters. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 336.
MR. MARTIN. Oh, a couple of quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement by Mr. Martin.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 337.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there's as solid anintellectual argument for 5 to 8 percent for M2 as there is for 4 to 7percent for M1. Why would the assumption of roughly, let's say, 0 to1 percent velocity of circulation for M2, be any different than a 2percent assumption for velocity of circulation for M1. I don't thinkthat's any shakier. We've been running about 1 percent, haven't we,for velocity of circulation for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is questioning whether the assumption of a 0 to 1 percent velocity of circulation for M2 is any different than a 2 percent assumption for velocity of circulation for M1. They argue that the assumption for M2 is not shakier than the assumption for M1.


Passage number 338.
MR. AXILROD. It's a little higher than that recently, butit's very erratic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention between parties. It simply states a fact about the erratic nature of something being a little higher than a certain level.


Passage number 339.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What's surprising about M2 is how lowit has been running.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is stating a fact without any indication of disagreement or debate. It is simply describing the surprising aspect of M2's low running.


Passage number 340.
MR. GRAMLEY. What would the secular trend be on M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or differences of opinion. It simply asks for an explanation of the secular trend on M2. There is no contention or disagreement presented in this statement.


Passage number 341.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we keep saying it's zero, but I wouldtake that with a grain of salt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing skepticism about the claim that something is zero, but there is no overt disagreement or contention.


Passage number 342.
MR. MORRIS. It depends on the model one is predicting from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention in this passage. The speaker simply states that the accuracy of a prediction depends on the model being used.


Passage number 343.
MR. WALLICH. But wouldn't you say that M3 at any rate has alower velocity than M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement or question for clarification.


Passage number 344.
MR. AXILROD. If my memory's right, historically, the growthof M3 runs a little higher than that of M2 so its velocity growthwould run a little lower, and that has been our very recentexperience. It might be worth giving our point estimates for 1985,Mr. Chairman: On an assumption of M1 growth on the order of 5-1/2 to-36-7/16-17/846 percent, we would have M2 growth around 7 to 7-1/2 percent, M3growth on the order of 8 percent, and debt [growth] declining toaround 10 percent for 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and discussing different growth estimates for M1, M2, M3, and debt.


Passage number 345.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's based on your economic forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is not necessarily contentious or indicating disagreement. It simply states that the forecast is based on an individual's economic outlook without implying any contradiction or contention.


Passage number 346.
MR. AXILROD. On 8 percent nominal GNP growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about 8 percent nominal GNP growth.


Passage number 347.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you say for Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any information or statements that could lead to contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification or repetition of a previous statement.


Passage number 348.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 349.
 We've assumed 5-3/4 percent as a pointestimate; 5-1/2 to 6 percent seems to me the area--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's with only an 8 percent nominalGNP, which I remind you is lower than everybody's forecast except thestaff's.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no direct contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their opinion about the range of percentages (5-1/2 to 6 percent) while acknowledging that the current estimate is 5-3/4 percent. They are also reminding the audience about the staff's forecast and how it is lower than other forecasts. However, there is no clear disagreement with any specific party mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 350.
MR. CORRIGAN. Personally, an 8 percent nominal GNP as agoal--as distinct from a forecast--is very appealing to me because Ithink the optimum that one could reasonably think about for 1985 issomething like 4 percent [real] and 4 percent [on prices]. In mymind, to the extent that nominal GNP grows faster than that, it wouldincrease the likelihood that more of it would be prices and less of itwould be real. So, primarily for that reason, if I think about '85from a policy viewpoint and what we should be shooting for, I come outwith around 8 percent nominal. In terms of the targets I am more thana little attracted to Tony's thought, but my initial thought had been4 to 7 percent for M1. But as I said, Tony's point has some merit.Personally, I would go with 4 to 7 percent, 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent,leave M3 where it is, and use 8 to 10-1/2 percent on credit. Thebottom of the credit range doesn't matter at all, but I do think thatshaving a half point off the top of that has some value. As I've saidbefore, I am really troubled by this explosion of credit that we areseeing. That consumer credit number yesterday is another indicationof this. Gosh--a 30 percent annual rate of increase in consumercredit. That's where I would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, mentions being attracted to Tony's thought, but also states his initial thought had been different. He proposes different target ranges for M1, M3, and credit growth. Additionally, he expresses concern about the "explosion of credit" and the high rate of increase in consumer credit.


Passage number 351.
MR. MARTIN. Jerry, you mentioned around 8 percent on nominalGNP for 1985; I'd be more in the 8-1/2 percent area or,optimistically, even 9 percent. I think we'll do better on thedeflator again as we've done better on the deflator repeatedly in veryrecent history. I demur from the staff's productivity projections, asyou know. And on that basis, I would leave the ranges for theaggregates where they are for now, as under alternative Roman numeralI. Then I'd be hopeful that in the review of 1985 a few months fromnow, we could either take the top of M1 down to 7 percent or, moreimportantly, take the top on M2 down to 8-1/2 or even 8 percent, as wesee what happens to velocity. The velocity variability has been sosubstantial that I'd hate to have the Chairman saddled with thoseassumptions in his testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is expressing his own views and opinions, but there is no clear disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 352.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask a basic question. I don'tunderstand Jerry's remark. If you're presenting the range of views ofthe FOMC and all of us are above the 8 percent that the staff has, areyou going to come up with an 8 percent figure and ignore the FOMCmembers. Is it the staff who make that assumption. Don't you have toadjust to an 8-1/2 percent [assumption for GNP] or whatever it may be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement.


Passage number 353.
-37-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose theoretically we can say thateverybody thinks it's going to be higher but, ideally, we want itlower. That's what we seem to be saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing a potential situation and stating that while everyone may believe it will be higher, their preference is for it to be lower.


Passage number 354.
MR. CORRIGAN(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear statement or information provided in the passage to indicate any contention or disagreement. The excerpt only mentions the name "Mr. Corrigan" without providing any additional context or information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 355.
 Tony, that's not what I--MR. GRAMLEY. The staff's views are of less value than theFOMC's. [Laughter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley's comment, "The staff's views are of less value than the FOMC's," suggests a difference of opinion or contention about the value of the staff's views compared to the FOMC's. The laughter from the audience also indicates a reaction to this disagreement.


Passage number 356.
]MR. MORRIS. Those numbers are not very useful, if we agreeto standardize an assumption on the value of the dollar. Certainly,our number would be lower on that assumption by 1 percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: While Mr. Morris suggests that the numbers may not be very useful, there is no evident disagreement or contention in the passage. He simply states that if they were to agree on a standardized assumption about the value of the dollar, their number would be lower by 1 percentage point.


Passage number 357.
MR. PARTEE. Mine too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This is a simple statement made by Mr. Partee, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 358.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because the deflator would be lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 359.
MR. MORRIS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is simply acknowledging an affirmative statement or question.


Passage number 360.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but there are some other thingsyou have to assume.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement provided simply mentions that there are additional assumptions that need to be considered.


Passage number 361.
MR. CORRIGAN. I think you've misunderstood what I wassaying. I was not suggesting anything like what you just said; I wasmaking a different point. A forecast is one thing. But part of theobjective of policy isn't to accept the forecast; part of theobjective of policy is to try to influence the way in which theeconomy behaves. I am simply saying that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is clarifying their previous statement and explaining their perspective, but there is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage.


Passage number 362.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have a bit of a problem, Ithink. At this stage that's right. But once you've set the policy,you should go back and look at the forecast, theoretically, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and suggesting that once a policy is set, it would be beneficial to review the forecast. There is no conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 363.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The provided passage "MR. CORRIGAN" does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 364.
 You start off with the policy too, but in thelatter context of trying to have policy influence the economy in themost constructive way--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, [but] 8-1/2 percent is still apretty ambitious target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a statement about having a policy influence the economy and mentions an ambitious target without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 365.
MR. MORRIS. In regard to this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 366.
MR. PARTEE. He means in terms of cutting [inflation].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply clarifying what the speaker meant by "cutting inflation."


Passage number 367.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I mean considering the priceinflation--keeping that [moderate]. After all, this is the third andlast year of a recovery. [Laughter.] In the two previous ones theinflation hit what--12 to 14 percent at the peak. If we can confineit to 5-1/2 percent, that's going to be quite a triumph, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about inflation rates in previous years and expressing a positive opinion about keeping inflation moderate.


Passage number 368.
MR. MARTIN. But my point is that the economy is going tofunction in such a way that it will be confined. It won't beexclusively [the result of] what we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is expressing his opinion about the economy's functionality, stating that it will be confined and not solely dependent on their actions.


Passage number 369.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 370.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, we forecast an 8-1/2percent nominal GNP for 1985 and that includes some depreciation of-38-7/16-17/84the dollar. Now, that's a forecast. I also think that that would bea pretty good objective to try to reach as well. With that in mind,as I look at the specifications for the monetary aggregates, I'minclined to go with alternative II. I think that M1 range of 4 to 7-1/2 percent is about right. It gives us a bit of maneuverability atthe top end. I'd leave M3 and debt where they are. M2 gives me alittle trouble. I would like to show some downward movement in thataggregate. On the other hand, it has been growing at a fairly slowpace, as we all know. The Bluebook mentions the fact that we're goingto have some financial changes due to the [regulatory] decrease in theminimum level of various accounts and indicates that those changesprobably will have a minimal effect. On the other hand, even aminimal effect might have an impact of moving M1 in the direction ofmore rapid growth than we've had. What I'm saying is that there's notmuch maneuverability if M2 moves a little faster than it has. So forthat reason, I think one could make an argument to move the M2 rangeup to 6 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing different options, but there is no direct opposition or clash of ideas.


Passage number 371.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it only mentions Mr. Boehne without providing any further information or context to indicate any potential conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 372.
MR. BOEHNE. I would feel most comfortable with alternativeII. I think it does send out the signal of continuing this longer-term goal of reducing inflation. It still gives us some flexibility,and I think it's consistent with our general ignorance about nextyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, expresses his comfort and agreement with alternative II and states that it aligns with the goal of reducing inflation and the uncertainty about the future. There is no indication of any opposing views or conflict.


Passage number 373.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions "Mr. Guffey" without providing any further information or context to suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 374.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also would opt foralternative II. I'm puzzled, however, why there is a narrowing of the[M2] range to 2-1/2 points as opposed to 3 points and, as a result, Iwould alter alternative II to 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent [for M2]. Wealso came out with 8-1/2 percent nominal for 1985 and alternative IImay or may not be consistent with that; but I am persuaded by Tony'sstrategy, if you will, to do 1/2 point now and if it looks as if inFebruary some other change could be made on the down side, then Iwould opt to do it then. It leaves us some flexibility for movementin February.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing the speaker's own opinions and proposed adjustments to alternative II.


Passage number 375.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is insufficient information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions "Mrs. Horn" and does not provide any further context or details.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 376.
MS. HORN. To speak about M1 for a moment: When we revisedthe M1 targets because of the problems we were having with velocityand the NOW account assumptions and so forth, if my memory serves meright, we moved them up 1-1/2 percentage points on the bottom of therange and 2-1/2 percentage points on the upper end of the range. Now,with the threat of future inflation and the course of fiscal policybeing slow [to adjust] in the future and, of course, with ourincreasing confidence in velocity of M1, I'd like to see the M1 rangenarrowed first and lowered second. I would narrow it because of thereduced uncertainty. That brings me to something like alternativeIII. I suppose between the two options [for M1] in alternative III,the 4 to 7 percent is more appealing to me because I think the upperend of the range has been particularly meaningful to us in theCommittee as we've operated. But I'm a little uncomfortable even with4 to 7 percent because I, like some other people around the table,like the idea of 8 percent nominal GNP as a policy objective. And I'ma little uncomfortable with assuming 2 percent velocity [growth]. I-39-7/16-17/84think we might get velocity coming in a bit higher than that. So, asI say, the two things I'd like to see are a narrowing of the M1 rangeand a lowering of the M1 range. And 4 to 7 percent doesn't quite makeme comfortable at this stage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Horn expresses disagreement with the current M1 range and suggests narrowing and lowering it. She also expresses discomfort with the assumption of 2 percent velocity growth and the 4 to 7 percent range, indicating that she would prefer a higher range and higher velocity growth.


Passage number 377.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 378.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Karen has pretty well made my talkexcept that I feel comfortable with a 4 to 7 percent range. I wouldgo with all the ranges under alternative III. But I'd just like toemphasize a bit more perhaps than she did that I think equallyimportant is our decision on the emphasis that we will put on Ml.With velocity picking up and the money market models tracking M1 muchbetter than usual, that suggests to me that M1 may be reassuming itsmore traditional relationship with GNP. So, I would like to makeanother quick pitch to restore M1 to at least its former full positionof equality. Of course, I'd like to push it a little more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply expressing his agreement with Karen's talk and adding his own thoughts and emphasis on the importance of M1 and its relationship with GNP. There is no mention of any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 379.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 380.
MR. KEEHN. In my view, the options are between alternativesI and II. One could make a compelling argument for "I" on the theorythat, given the forecasting uncertainties that we talked aboutyesterday as well as the now compounding velocity considerations, wecould just simply leave the present ranges in place and suggest thatwhen the year is over and we're setting the targets more firmly inFebruary, we will take another look. But a bit more compelling is themessage that would be conveyed. Therefore, I would come down onoption II with the thought that it is a continuation of a program thatwe have been embarked on. I [support] Tony's argument that if, as weget into next February, the history is such that we could go down to 7percent, that would be appropriate too. So, I think it's a closebalance, but of the two I'd come down for option number II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own viewpoint and weighing the options, ultimately coming to a decision.


Passage number 381.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage given.


Passage number 382.
MR. ROBERTS. I agree with Tony that the intellectualargument is for 4 to 7 percent, with Lyle that the message is muchmore important than the tactics, and with Karen that narrowing is thecritical thing at this point. I think we need to have a strongmessage. We have a very strong momentum going here and I'd muchrather see us, if necessary, run over [the range] and say we'reworking toward something that we think is satisfactory in the longrun, which is what we're talking about here. So, I would prefer tosee us have a 4 to 7 percent band on M1 and that range should be verycomfortable whether velocity growth is 2 or 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roberts expresses agreement with Tony, Lyle, and Karen on different aspects of the discussion.


Passage number 383.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, the passage you provided is incomplete. Please provide the full passage so that I can accurately answer your question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 384.
MR. BALLES. In deciding between alternatives II and III, I'minfluenced by our staff's forecast of velocity for the coming year.We expect it to continue to show a significant rise--certainly abovethe less than 2 percent that the Board's staff has forecast. Afterall, the first half of this year is up, with a 4-1/2 percent annualrate. We look at it on a quarter-by-quarter basis; we've had threesignificant rises in velocity and we expect that to go up further in1985. Who is right, of course, remains to be determined. But basedon that and based on our views of long standing here that we really7/16-17/84need to restore M1 to at least its former position--I agree with BobBlack on that--I would come down in favor of alternative III, usingthe 4 to 7 percent option.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is disagreeing with the Board's staff forecast of velocity for the coming year. He believes that the velocity will show a significant rise, whereas the Board's staff has forecasted it to be less than 2 percent.


Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions "Governor Partee" without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 386.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't think we ought to reduce the lowerend of any of the ranges. Regardless of whether or not they have beenan issue, they would become an issue if there should be a flagging inthe economy and [monetary growth] should drop down toward them. Andit seems to me that at this stage of the recovery there's no reason weshould want to have very low rates of increase in any of theaggregates. So, that leads me to alternative II. Leaving M3 and debtas they are this year is certainly reasonable and appropriate when oneconsiders that growth is going to be over on both of them this year.So, I think that's right. I would cut the top on M2 to 8-1/2 percentas alternative II does. I'm sympathetic with Lyle's point. We don'treally know what has been going on there, but my view is that we oughtto show some progress and if, in fact, something has been odd aboutit, we'll just have to run over a bit. On M1, I'm sympathetic to theidea of narrowing the range and I would make it 4 to 7 percent--choosing from alternative III in that case--accepting not the midpointas our target but someplace within the range, and very possibly towardthe upper end of that 4 to 7 percent range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee expresses his opinion and makes suggestions based on his own reasoning.


Passage number 387.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only mentions a person's name, "Ms. Seger," without any indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 388.
MS. SEGER. Perhaps because I live in Si Keehn's District,I'm inclined to emphasize the uncertainties that we seem to face todayand the lack of our ability to hit bull's eyes with forecasts.Therefore, I think it makes sense to go either with alternative I orpossibly to pick up for M1 the 4 to 7-1/2 percent range, which wouldbe simply a signal of narrowing the range a bit. This would leave uswith the option in February to review the situation and at that pointtake off another half point from the upper end. It leaves us morelatitude to move.My basic reason for going this way is that I'm impressed bythe slowing that I see in the economy. Certainly, at least in theDetroit area, [economic activity] is way above where it was two yearsago and yet the rate of increase is definitely slowing. And I'm alsoimpressed by the chances for an auto strike this fall. No one knowsfor sure, certainly, but I think that definitely is a possibility; andif it does occur, chances are good that it would be [against] GM whichwould put a big dent in overall economic activity. So that's on mymind. Also, I think we have made some tremendous changes in theeconomy that are not showing up yet in the econometric models, etc.In terms of our basic inflationary problem, I think the capacityfigures are underestimating what the capacity is in this country;therefore, I believe the capacity utilization rates show us operatingmuch more closely to our ceilings than, in fact, is the case. Also,looking in a very microeconomic way industry-by-industry, it's hardfor me to find one that's in a boil or is really bumping against oreven close to its ceiling. So, that influences me.On the productivity question, I think there are changes goingon in the business community that are really dramatic: a greatcommitment in manufacturing to modernize, to adopt the latest-41-7/16-17/84technology, and to gut existing factories and put in more modern kindsof equipment. I think management today realizes that they either haveto do this or they are not going to survive very long; that commitmentis really there. Also, with the improved profits, they are able tofund some of these improvements, which is very important. It probablydoesn't show up in our productivity numbers right this minute, but Ithink it definitely will show up. In non-manufacturing industriesalso, I think management has a commitment to greater efficiency. Theprofits squeeze back in '81 and '82 and a little in '83 reallypunished them. There's a bottom line discipline in business thatmaybe people in government don't understand. And I think that also isgoing to show up more and more. Finally, in terms of wagesettlements, there are obviously the union settlements that theChairman referred to, but there are also a lot of nonunionized workersand a lot of small businesses that Mr. Boehne's personnel departmentdoesn't bother to include in its survey. And many of these employershaven't given any wage increases for the last couple of years; a lotof people were just darn happy to hold onto their jobs which, again,is a big change in attitude. And the fact that we have had goodinflation numbers in '82 and '83 and so far in '84 is convincingmanagement that they can be tougher. Furthermore, they are doing morediscriminating in the good sense of the word; that is, they're tryingto reward the producers and the high achievers very well and the "dud"types can get zero or something less than zero. So, all of this to mesuggests that the inflation outlook for next year is probably somewhatmore optimistic than I've been hearing around this table. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing her own views and opinions on various economic factors.


Passage number 389.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Wallich without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 390.
MR. WALLICH. I'd say M1, 4 to 7 percent; M2, 5 to 8 percent;M3, 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent; and debt, 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent. Whenthe chips are down, I think it's the upper end of the range and notthe midpoint that really sticks in peoples' minds. Four to sevenpercent, therefore, means--if we're lucky on velocity--nine percent onthe nominal GNP, or it could be ten percent. And I think that's toohigh. That does not give us a chance for a soft landing. As betweenM2 and M3, I would like to introduce the old differentiation therebecause I sense that there is a difference; but I don't have a verystrong conviction. On debt, it troubles me very much to see thisrapid expansion. The consumer credit numbers are not the results ofany buyouts or mergers. So, I would be very reluctant to see thatraised simply to adjust to what may be a reality. We ought toindicate that this is a target rather than a projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and concerns about the different monetary measures, but there is no direct disagreement with any other person or viewpoint.


Passage number 391.
MR. CORRIGAN. It's kind of like a hippopotamus, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is comparing something to a hippopotamus, which does not imply any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 392.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as there is no specific passage provided.


Passage number 393.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, being a bit of an outlier interms of the forecast, I don't think it is overly surprising thatalternative III has appeal to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Boykin simply expresses that alternative III has appeal to him, suggesting that he is in agreement with it.


Passage number 394.
 I'd take 4 to 7 percent for the M1range and M2, M3 and --CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because it's so inconsistent with yourforecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion on the percentage they would take for the M1range and M2, M3, and explaining why they believe it is inconsistent with the forecast.


Passage number 395.
MR. BOYKIN. I would take the [alternative III] M2, M3, anddebt ranges as presented in the Bluebook. I will concede that Tony's-42-7/16-17/84argument, in terms of the presentation and the flexibility it wouldgive us, has some appeal. If we were doing this in February, I wouldfeel much stronger in that view than I do right now. But I leantoward "III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boykin acknowledges that Tony's argument has appeal and mentions that he would feel stronger about it in a different context. However, he ultimately leans towards the alternative III presented in the Bluebook.


Passage number 396.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further information.


Passage number 397.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think it's much more logical forus to be setting targets for '85 in February than it is in July thepreceding year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement expressing the speaker's opinion.


Passage number 398.
 In the past we have typically--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We tried that once.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the past without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 399.
MR. MORRIS. Well, that is one reason that I like alternativeI--that is, no change in the guidelines for the moment. That's notwith any conviction that we wouldn't want to change them in Februarybut, obviously, we'll have a lot more information in February insetting these ranges than we do now. That seems to me a good argumentfor staying with the present guidelines, with the understanding thatwe might, and probably would, want to change them in February.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be expressing a personal opinion or preference about the guidelines, with the understanding that they may be changed in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 400.
 Ithink that would be a better procedure than doing what we've done inthe past when we have changed the guidelines at midyear and then feltthat we were more or less stuck with those guidelines in February whenwe really ought to be doing our basic thinkingCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I really don't think that option is opento us. If you will recall, everybody was on the Committee when wetried precisely that one year and got sent back like bad boys to go doour work over again. We were told to come up with the guidelines forthe following year in July--that that was what the law required.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The first statement suggests that the speaker believes it would be better to change guidelines at midyear instead of sticking to them in February. However, the second statement disagrees with this option by referencing a past incident where the committee was not successful in changing the guidelines midyear and were told to come up with them in July instead.


Passage number 401.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I'm not saying that we don't present somenumbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Morris is making a statement but there is no opposing view presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 402.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you're coming pretty close to sayingthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention, as the speaker implies that the other person's viewpoint is almost aligning with their own but still falls short.


Passage number 403.
MR. BLACK. We also would be operating for at least a month,or more than a month, before we really decided what our targets forthat period were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement presented by Mr. Black is discussing the need for a specific amount of time to determine targets, without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 404.
MR. MORRIS. Well, that's true, but the kinds of changeswe're talking about here are not so dramatic that that is particularlyoperational.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement that agrees with the previous statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 405.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have anything to say.Well, let me try this in reverse order. After listening to this, Icome out very close to where some other people came out, but without acomplete sense of conviction. On debt, we are all conscious thatwe're running way above and I don't hear any great sentiment to reducethat very much. You put down 8 to 11 percent; that bothers me a bit.No, let me start differently. From what I hear people saying, interms of policy--and this encompasses most people's, but noteverybody's, forecast--we are talking about a nominal GNP of 8 to 9percent. There aren't many at 8 percent--only the staff. There are alot between 8-1/2 and 9 percent and some above 9 percent, to be sure.But in terms of a policy objective I sense that that's about where weare. If that's where we are, a debt range of 8 to 11 percent, which-43-7/16-17/84is unchanged and allows for a larger growth in debt than GNP for thethird or fourth consecutive year, is not an entirely happycircumstance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the level of debt and implies that others may not share the same sentiment. They also mention that some people have a higher growth forecast for the GNP than others, which suggests differing opinions or disagreements.


Passage number 406.
MR. MORRIS. Well, the midpoint of that range would becompatible with an 8-1/2 percent growth in nominal GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact or point of agreement. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 407.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's 1 percent higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Well, it's 1 percent higher" is stating a fact without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 408.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, but I think one would expect that in athird year of expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about what one would expect in a third year of expansion.


Passage number 409.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I'm saying is that if I had anyquestion about it, just as a normative proposition, I'd make it 8 to10-1/2 percent or someplace in that neighborhood. For M3, 6 to 9percent seems to reflect a lot of the thinking, I guess on the basisthat the debt has been running high and it certainly allows us enoughroom on the down side. On M2, we get more questionable. If we'regiving weight to running high on the others, we might give a littleweight to running low on M2, and in the interest of showing somedecline go with a range of 6 to 8-1/2 percent. I don't know; it maybe psychological, but perhaps it doesn't look too bad. When we get toMl--. What has nominal GNP been in the first half of this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

This passage does not contain any apparent contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different percentages and ranges related to different measures of money supply (M3, M2, and M1) but there is no clear disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 410.
MR. KICHLINE. 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is simply stating a percentage, there is no contention or disagreement indicated.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 411.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On M1, I get a little concerned. It hasrun about 7-1/2 percent so far this year--within the range--with the12 percent nominal GNP. If we're aiming for an 8 to 9 percent nominalGNP, based upon recent experience it seems to me that the range oughtto be lower or we will give a rather peculiar signal. Then it's aquestion of how much to lower it. If you allow a 2 to 3 percentvelocity increase, 4 to 7 percent seems all right and gives the rightsignal. Then we get into this tactical question of whether to do ahalf point now and maybe do a half point later. Just sitting here, Idon't have any absolute final conviction about this. It has beenrunning 7-1/2 percent so far this year; announcing that we'resatisfied with 7-1/2 percent next year but are looking toward adecline in the nominal GNP on the order of 3 to 4 percentage pointsstrikes me as a bit peculiar. I'm assuming here that we don't puttremendous weight on the midpoint and that the most operative thingtends to be the upper limit. A number of people have said and a lotof people would interpret that as the same growth in the money supplynext year as this year with a hope or stated objective of havingsubstantially lower nominal GNP growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concerns and suggests that the range for M1 should be lower in order to send the right signal. They also question whether to decrease it by half a point now or later. The speaker's hesitation and lack of absolute conviction indicate that there is contention over the appropriate course of action.


Passage number 412.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, except that we expect thevelocity of circulation to come down significantly from the 4-1/2percent it has been running over the first half of this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage presents information without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 413.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would be true even if it were cut inhalf; the 7 percent would allow for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is made with certainty and there is no opposing point of view or conflicting information presented.


Passage number 414.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there is an intellectualargument for 4 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their personal belief or opinion regarding an intellectual argument.


Passage number 415.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I just put down here is the same as acouple of people have suggested: 8 to 11 percent; 6 to 9 percent; 6 to-44-7/16-17/848-1/2 percent; and 4 to 7 percent. And I think implicitly we weightthem all equally. There are a whole lot of caveats around all ofthem, as Mr. Axilrod suggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The author is simply stating that different percentages have been suggested by different people, and acknowledges that there are caveats surrounding each of them.


Passage number 416.
MR. BOEHNE. The problem that I see with that is that if weuse 4 to 7 percent, I can conceive of a situation next February where7 percent might be too low. And it is difficult, I think, to raiseit; it's easier to drop it. I'm not sure we convey any more of amessage if we drop it by a whole point now and couch it in all these"iffy" terms. That's the main problem that I see with going all theway to 7 percent now. It does tend to foreclose on some of ourflexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing his own concerns and problem with using 7 percent as a benchmark. He raises potential issues and points to consider, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 417.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what could happen next February.None of us knows. Let's suppose we're running above that [range] nextFebruary for good and understandable reasons; that must mean thatwe're worried about something--interest rates or something in theeconomy. In that kind of scenario we would go [to Congress] and say,"Look, you haven't done anything about the budget. We can't hold itby monetary policy alone without running undue risks. We're going tohave to raise this target and that is all the more reason [you] oughtto be working on the budget deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that if they have to raise a certain target due to worries about the economy, it is a result of the government not taking action on the budget deficit. This suggests that the government is not doing enough and implies a disagreement or contention between the speaker and the government's actions.


Passage number 418.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we raise the target, then they aregoing to feel less pressure to work on the budgetary deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement does not mention any conflicting opinions or arguments. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario and suggests a potential outcome.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 419.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we haven't made the decision. It'sat least debatable. I don't know whether they will or won't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is uncertainty and a difference of opinion about the decision being discussed.


Passage number 420.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You have more faith than I do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the person being addressed has more faith than the speaker.


Passage number 421.
MR. PARTEE. We would do that, I think, in a situation ofconsiderable upward pressure on interest rates and then say, "Well, wejust can't hold the money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by someone expressing their belief or opinion about a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 422.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the circumstance in which wecouldn't hold the money is when we're having significant upwardpressures on interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There doesn't appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the circumstances in which they couldn't hold the money.


Passage number 423.
MR. MARTIN. A 7-1/2 percent top for M1 wouldn't be enough ofa signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 424.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's what we're debatinghere. I don't know whether it's enough or not, but it looks prettymealy-mouthed. It depends on how one interprets it. If oneinterprets it as the midpoint, it's okay. If one interprets it moreas the operative [number], what one really gets concerned about isbreaking through the top, which I think is more the reality in thissituation. And it looks like not much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is a disagreement or contention about whether something is enough or not, as well as how it should be interpreted. Different interpretations are mentioned, indicating differing viewpoints.


Passage number 425.
MR. BOEHNE. But in the context of M1 running high in itsrange, it would signal more of a constraining message, I would think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely expressing their opinion or thought about a particular scenario.


Passage number 426.
MR. GRAMLEY. Not too bad an idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Not too bad an idea" indicates a generally positive or neutral sentiment.


Passage number 427.
MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without having access to the actual content of the passage. The phrase "MR. BOEHNE" by itself does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 428.
 I'm not saying it's a bad idea, but I'm sayingif you're looking at how it is going to be interpreted---45-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're using the present projection,which is for substantially slower growth in nominal GNP than we're nowgetting. The whole thing is based upon that assumption. It may bewrong. Who can tell all about it. But I think that is the assumptioneither as a forecast or as an objective that we're faced with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging that there is uncertainty and possibility of being wrong, but there is no direct disagreement with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 429.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think one ought to put this in a somewhatlonger-run context also. That is, if the Federal Reserve is stillsetting as an objective a long-run return to price stability, we dohave to contemplate a gradual reduction in growth in all the monetaryaggregates over time. This is now the fifth year of this long-rangeprogram and we are talking about setting targets for the sixth year.And we begin to worry about an upper limit of 7 percent. That looks alittle bizarre to me in the context of where we're supposed to begoing. After all, if the long-run growth of velocity is 2 percent orthereabouts, with no rise in interest rates then we're going to haveto get M1 down somewhere in the neighborhood of 2 to 3 percentagepoints--given what we think is potential growth--to get back to pricestability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and concerns about the upper limit of 7 percent for M1 growth. They find it "a little bizarre" and raise the point that in order to achieve price stability, M1 growth would need to be reduced to around 2 to 3 percentage points. However, there is no direct disagreement or conflict present in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 430.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. There may be no long-rangegrowth in velocity. I don't discard that hypothesis entirely in thepresent world, in which case this is going to be too low and we willjust have to say that. We don't have the evidence to make that caseright now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The author expresses uncertainty and states that there may or may not be long-range growth in velocity. They mention that if there is no growth, the current prediction of velocity will be too low. The lack of evidence to support either case adds to the disagreement or contention.


Passage number 431.
MR. RICE. Well, assuming that you are right and that Lyle isright, don't we get more psychological impact if we reduce the upperlimit twice--one-half point now and one-half point in February, ifthings still look promising--rather than going down one point now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a hypothetical scenario and discussing a potential strategy.


Passage number 432.
MR. PARTEE. It might be pretty hard to make that secondhalf-point reduction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a potential difficulty in achieving a second half-point reduction.


Passage number 433.
MR. RICE. Why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 434.
MR. PARTEE. Well, there would be a new Administrationsetting out on a new term and all that. I can see that there might besome political problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges the possibility of political problems that could arise with a new administration.


Passage number 435.
MR. MARTIN. But the election would be over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "But the election would be over" is simply a response to something that was said before.


Passage number 436.
MR. PARTEE. I know it would be over. And whichever partywins, there would be the new plans for the next four years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact that after an election, regardless of which party wins, there will be new plans for the next four years.


Passage number 437.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me forget about M1 at themoment, just for the purpose of advancing the discussion. Do theother three look broadly acceptable or even narrowly acceptable.SEVERAL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to focus on three specific things and asking if they are acceptable.


Passage number 438.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we just talking about Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a question asking if the discussion is solely focused on ML.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 439.
MR. GUFFEY. I would like to raise a question again about M2.Why narrow the range of M2. What's the impact and what's the purposeof that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey is questioning why the range of M2 is being narrowed and wants to know the impact and purpose of this decision. His questioning implies that he disagrees with the decision to narrow the range of M2 and wants more information to understand its reasoning and effects.


Passage number 440.
-46-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only, I guess, that nobody can envisionits growth being below 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a guess about the growth rate being at least 6 percent, but it does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 441.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, neither can one envision it being belowthe other ranges. It is a change that doesn't seem to net anything tome. Why do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their inability to understand the purpose or value of a certain change.


Passage number 442.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's a really gutty move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "It's a really gutty move" is a statement of praise or admiration.


Passage number 443.
MR. GUFFEY. Really gutty, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a simple statement or response. There is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 444.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what would you do then--5-1/2to 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It is a question that is seeking input or suggestions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 445.
MR. GUFFEY. Sure. Keep the 3 percentage point range. Wehave narrowed the M1 range; however, we come out to a 3 point range.Why then would we take one additional step and narrow the M2 range.It makes no sense to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, expresses his disagreement with narrowing the M2 range, stating that it makes no sense to him.


Passage number 446.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it just seems to me, Roger, that wewouldn't want 5-1/2 percent growth in M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 447.
MR. GUFFEY. Nor, I should think, would we want perhaps the 4percent of M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement as it simply mentions a percentage of M1 without introducing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 448.
MR. PARTEE. No, I can live with four percent, but I couldn'tlive with a lower M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 449.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think Roger has a point. Wewouldn't want M3 to come in at 6 percent. I don't know; I guess itdepends on what you place more importance. I assume people are notgoing to be looking at the bottom of the range in this recoveryperiod, although it might become important at the end of 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I think Roger has a point" implies agreement with Roger's viewpoint, while the phrase "I don't know; I guess it depends on what you place more importance" indicates hesitation and suggests the speaker may have a differing opinion.


Passage number 450.
 It'sthe scenario--MR. GUFFEY. As analysts look at it, they will detect thatthere is an area of the range that they won't have an explanation for.And we don't have an explanation for it, so why do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is merely stating that there is a scenario that analysts will not be able to explain, and questioning the purpose of pursuing it without having an explanation.


Passage number 451.
MR. MORRIS. One thing we ought to keep in mind is that thestaff assumes that the reduction of the minimum on the Super NOWs andmoney market deposit accounts from $2,500 to $1,000 is going to haveno effect or a minimal effect. Now, if that assumption is wrong, thenwe might need a larger M1 than we're currently contemplating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. Mr. Morris is simply stating that the assumption made by the staff regarding the reduction of the minimum on Super NOWs and money market deposit accounts may be incorrect, and that a larger M1 may be necessary if that assumption is proven wrong.


Passage number 452.
MR. PARTEE. That's possible, Frank, but I think we wouldhave to say that at the time. We're not even going to know that onthe first of February or whenever it is we have to set the ranges;that [Super NOW change] takes effect, I believe, January 1. It mightbe that the way [the banks] would market this is to say that peoplecould give up the MMDA and put all the funds in a Super NOW and thebank will pay the [MMDA] interest rate. But we've got to see thathappen before [we change the range]. That's an institutional changeand, therefore, we would say that there has been an institutionalchange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the need to wait and observe the effects of a potential institutional change before making any decisions about setting ranges.


Passage number 453.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it only states the name "Mr. Morris" without presenting any conflicting statements or opinions.


Passage number 454.
 We have a little knowledge of what---47-7/16-17/84MR. BLACK. Well, to put a little meat on what I think was avery excellent statement by Lyle, we rebased last year and went to 5to 9 percent on M1 and we came out at about the midpoint. If we'relucky enough this year to come out somewhere near the midpoint of 6percent, that would be two years in a row that we are moving in thedirection we want. And if we come out somewhere near 5-1/2 percentnext year, that will add a lot to what I think is already a very highcredibility of our anti-inflationary stance. But I do think it isvital that we continue to move in that way because, as Lyle said, westill have a long way to go to get where I think we all ultimatelywant to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements. It is mainly expressing agreement and support for the idea of moving in an anti-inflationary direction.


Passage number 455.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm off M1 at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the location of the speaker without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 456.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. You're talking about theother three. I think Roger has a point. I think it helps send amessage that we're going to be following a tough policy, and I don'tsee the reasoning for narrowing the spread. We certainly cannotanswer that we have slightly more certainty about hitting the M2 rangethan the others, which would be the only justification for narrowingthe spread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges Roger's point and expresses their agreement with him. They do, however, disagree with narrowing the spread but provide their reasoning without arguing or contradicting anyone else.


Passage number 457.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's the justification. It maybe completely wrong, but M2 in fact has been behaving much more stablyfor quite a while than the other two have. It has been a nice, even--and it may be a total illusion but--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their opinion and acknowledging that they may be mistaken, but at the moment, M2 has been displaying more stable behavior compared to the other two.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 458.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought Steve was saying that thevelocity of circulation of M2 has been very erratic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I thought" suggests that the speaker's understanding or interpretation differs from what Steve is saying about the velocity of circulation of M2.


Passage number 459.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, historically it has been. It iserratic this year, but the [average] number has been quite steady.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement acknowledges that the situation in question has been historically steady, but there is some fluctuation in the current year.


Passage number 460.
MR. AXILROD. I averaged it out for the past 22 years. Theaverage is close to zero. But there is hardly a number in any yearnear zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not expressing any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating a fact about the average over the past 22 years.


Passage number 461.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Velocity has been erratic because the[annual M2 growth] numbers have been so stable while the GNP [growthrate] has been changing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states that the velocity has been erratic due to stable M2 growth numbers while the GNP growth rate has been changing.


Passage number 462.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What's your objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for the other person's objection, indicating a willingness to listen and consider their perspective.


Passage number 463.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're not talking about a big dealhere; 5-1/2 percent just seems awful low to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker simply expresses their personal opinion about the interest rate being low. There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage.


Passage number 464.
MR. MARTIN. Jim, the ranges the Chairman has tentativelysuggested would produce some upward pressures on interest ratesaccording to your analysis here. I've been trying to re-read this andI can't quite put it all together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It shows Mr. Martin seeking clarification and expressing difficulty in understanding the analysis.


Passage number 465.
MR. AXILROD. I was talking to President Balles. I didn'thear you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they were talking to President Balles and did not hear the other person.


Passage number 466.
MR. MARTIN. I was asking Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is simply expressing that he was asking Jim about something.


Passage number 467.
MR. KICHLINE. In the forecast we have assumed M1 at around7-1/2 percent and for 1985 we have 5-1/2 to 6 percent for M1. We're-48-7/16-17/84talking about something close to the midpoints of these ranges, in anyevent. So, I don't see anything significantly different than in thestaff forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kichline, states that he does not see anything significantly different than the staff forecast.


Passage number 468.
MR. MARTIN. There would be some upward pressure, you think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin simply poses a question or statement, and there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 469.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we had that in the forecast. That'sright.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline simply affirms that they had that information in the forecast.


Passage number 470.
MR. MARTIN. And that would remain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any specific statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement by Mr. Martin.


Passage number 471.
MR. KICHLINE. Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply mentions someone's name and indicates correctness, without any conflict involved.


Passage number 472.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With these near the midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "With these near the midpoint" does not contain any conflicting or opposing ideas. It simply introduces a concept or situation without expressing disagreement.


Passage number 473.
MR. KICHLINE. Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only contains one sentence and does not imply any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a simple statement of agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 474.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Were there any other comments on anythingbut M1. This question has been raised about M2. Let me narrow itdown to M2. Is there any feeling about 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent versus6 to 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks for comments or feelings on a specific topic, without conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 475.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I could go either way on that one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement expresses flexibility and openness to different options, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 476.
MR. PARTEE. I have a slight preference for the 6 to 8-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a personal preference of Mr. Partee.


Passage number 477.
MR. MARTIN. I do also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Martin simply states that he also agrees with something, without showing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 478.
MR. RICE. So do I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement made by another person.


Passage number 479.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me return to M1. I don't thinkthat I'm going to press this to an absolute vote right at the moment.We can come back and pull everything together in light of [ourdecision on] the short run. But I think we're between 4 and 7 percentand 4 and 7-1/2 percent. That seems to be the general range of[views].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and stating a range of views without expressing any disagreement.


Passage number 480.
MR. PARTEE. Only Karen wanted a lower range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact about a person's opinion, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 481.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, this is an observation about whatwe've done in the past. I've just been asking Steve what the recordshows. My recollection has been that whatever targets we set atmidyear, we very seldom--in fact, I thought never--changed them. Hehas come up with one exception, in recent years at least, and that wasin February of 1983 when we apparently did depart from what we'd setin mid-1982. I don't recall [why]. In any event, for whateverreason, I never quite understood why we didn't allow ourselves theflexibility that at least in theory we ought to have. But the recordshows that when we've adopted a set of targets in July, we apparentlyhave felt compelled for some reason to go along with those again inJanuary in almost every case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their observation about the record of previous targets and expressing their confusion about why the targets were not changed.


Passage number 482.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think "in almost every case" is acorrect statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I think 'in almost every case' is a correct statement" expresses the speaker's opinion, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 483.
MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of the M1 target, as I said before, Iwould prefer the 4 to 7 percent. That's what I keep coming back to inthinking about it. Again, I could probably live with something like-49-7/16-17/84Tony suggested. What really is at stake here is not just trying tohave a policy that will produce a result that will look something likethe staff forecast in 1985. It's beyond that. I don't think it'sinevitable that 1985 has to be the last year of the recovery. But myview is rather strongly that if it's not going to be the last year ofrecovery, it has to be a year in which we have the kind of moremoderate growth that we're all talking about. So, personally, I thinkpolicy should lean on the side of the result that not only enhancesthe possibility of growth and modest inflation in 1985, but being ableto sustain it beyond that. And I think the risks are very clearlythat the more we deviate from that on the up side, the more itincreases the likelihood that it will be the last year of therecovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 484.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're down to a very narrow issue.How many of the Committee members prefer the 4 to 7 percent. Six.Maybe some are indifferent. How many prefer the 4 to 7-1/2 percent.All right. Let's look at it in the light of our short-run decision.What do we have to do yet. We have to listen to Mr. Sternlight--[Mr.Meek, today]--and Mr. Cross first. Now is as good a time as any toget that in. Mr. Meek.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the process and steps that need to be taken, without expressing any disagreement or debate.


Passage number 485.
MR. CROSS. Did you call on me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. It is a simple question posed by Mr. Cross.


Passage number 486.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, whoever goes first. I guess you gofirst.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply defers to the other person to go first.


Passage number 487.
MR. CROSS. I usually go first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about their usual behavior without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 488.
MR. ROBERTS. Stay in there, Sam.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roberts simply gives an instruction to someone named Sam to "stay in there."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 489.
MR. BLACK. Fight for your rights, Sam.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is urging someone named Sam to fight for their rights, indicating a disagreement or contention between them and possibly another party that is attempting to infringe upon those rights.


Passage number 490.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to follow all theprecedents.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker is expressing their opinion that they believe all precedents should be followed.


Passage number 491.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only contains a statement by Mr. Cross, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 492.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 493.
MR. BOEHNE. I have a question on this decoupling of foreigninterest rates from U.S. interest rates. Some foreign central bankerstake a great deal of pride in talking about that. Does anybody haveany sense as to whether that indeed has been successful and what theoutlook for its success is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a question and seeking information.


Passage number 494.
MR. CROSS. Well, it's awfully hard to speak very generally.The conditions vary a great deal from country to country and situationto situation. Obviously, the Canadians found great difficulty inkeeping their interest rates very far away from reflecting the rise inours. The Germans have been seeking to avoid following the increasesin U.S. interest rates but, as I said here, it has resulted in quitelarge amounts of intervention in the exchange market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 495.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make a general comment on thesubject. More generally, as I read the situation, economicdevelopments abroad are quite unsatisfactory in terms even of earlierexpectations, which weren't all that buoyant. I don't want to-50-7/16-17/84overdramatize this, but they are just not moving with any speed andalacrity. I don't think there's any doubt that our interest rates arecomplicating things. The two most marked examples, I think, are theCanadians and the British. The British talk proudly about decoupling;they don't think they're decoupled today. They've had problemsdomestically that have aggravated this situation, but they are veryunhappy about having to see this very sharp increase in interest ratesthat they currently have when the economy is doing nothing and theyhave a 12 percent unemployment rate. In Canada, the unemployment rateis between 11 and 12 percent. It has sat there for a long time eventhough the economy is growing, mainly because of exports to the UnitedStates. On the continent of Europe and in Japan, the economies arenot exceeding our earlier expectations, which weren't all thatbuoyant. If anything, they're falling a bit below. Is that true, Mr.Truman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is primarily a statement of the speaker's opinion and observations.


Passage number 496.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes. Slightly above, if I may correct you, onJapan, but below elsewhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply correcting a small error in the information given.


Passage number 497.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is increasing concern there. Idon't want to overemphasize it but the concern is there. I think ourinterest rate picture is not helping things in that connection.Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the interest rate picture and how it may not be helping matters.


Passage number 498.
MR. WALLICH. I wanted to ask Sam: How much support do youthink there would be in the market for a projection that the dollarwill drop 15 percent over the next year, ignoring the immediate short-term situation that causes people, of course, to take the positionsthey do take.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage is a question posed by one person (Mr. Wallich) to another person (Sam) regarding their opinion on the market's support for a projection. There is no disagreement or contention evident in the passage.


Passage number 499.
MR. CROSS. Do you mean do I think that there would be a viewthat the dollar might do this. I didn't quite [hear you].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Cross is simply clarifying a question and asking for further clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 500.
MR. WALLICH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The use of "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 501.
MR. CROSS. I think that most of the people in the markethave become quite jaundiced after having seen a number of very largebalance of payments deficits and large trade deficits and hearingrepeatedly that this was going to bring down the dollar but not havingseen it happen. So the people in the market, as opposed to the peoplemaking the forecasts, do not really seem much impressed by this. Theyknow, as everybody knows, that at some point the dollar is going tocome down. But the matter of when is of extreme importance in theexchange market, and these people tend to take a fairly short timehorizon anyhow. So, I don't think there is a widespread expectationof any very early decline in the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his own opinion and observations about the market's perception of the dollar's decline.


Passage number 502.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And a lot of them have been losingmoney on foreign exchange operations. went from a $24million profit in foreign exchange operations in the first quarter toa $12 million loss in the second quarter because most of them had beenbetting on some decline. I would agree with Sam that they are takingboth a short-term view and a fairly jaundiced view about their earlierexpectations of a dollar decline. So, they have retreated somewhatnow to thinking that maybe the dollar isn't going to decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply stating that many entities have been losing money on foreign exchange operations and agreeing with Sam's viewpoint that they are now considering the possibility that the dollar may not decline.


Passage number 503.
-51-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would think that most people would sayintellectually that the dollar ought to decline, but they're notwilling to bet on it right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement about people's views on the decline of the dollar without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 504.
MR. CROSS. That's right. Those who have are now in thehardware business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about those who have something being in the hardware business.


Passage number 505.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions. We have to ratifysome transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply suggests that there may be additional questions and that certain transactions need to be ratified. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 506.
MR. CROSS. Yes. We did $135 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a piece of information without any indication of disagreement or debate.


Passage number 507.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage "So moved" alone. This phrase does not provide enough context or information to determine if there is any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 508.
MR. CORRIGAN. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage includes a statement from Mr. Corrigan, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Corrigan is speaking second.


Passage number 509.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Meek.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection" suggests that there was no opposition or disagreement among the people involved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 510.
MR. MEEK. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It appears to be a straightforward statement by Mr. Meek.


Passage number 511.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 512.
MR. MARTIN. What is your evaluation of, let's say, theintermediate-term strength of the fears and the difficulties withregard to bank CDs, bank soundness, interbank market availability andso forth. Is it a passing phase associated with Continental,Argentina, and so forth. Or is something going on here that's likelyto be a malaise going forward. What's your feel for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is asking for the opinion of someone else regarding the intermediate-term strength of fears and difficulties related to bank CDs, bank soundness, and the interbank market. He presents two possible viewpoints - one suggesting that it is a passing phase associated with specific events like Continental and Argentina, and the other suggesting that it is a problem likely to continue in the future. The disagreement lies in the different perspectives or "feel" that the speaker might have regarding the situation.


Passage number 513.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what Mr. Meek's view is, butI'll tell you my opinion is that there's no chance that it's a passingphase that is going to evaporate in a matter of weeks or months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is expressing the speaker's own opinion without reference to any opposing views or conflicting perspectives.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 514.
MR. ROBERTS. One should give some consideration to the factthat banks have been expanding CDs very rapidly in recent months,however. I don't think this entire widening of spreads would be asqualitative as you analyze it. Spreads always widen when they pumpCDs up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. MR. ROBERTS disagrees with the analysis that the widening of spreads in banks is qualitative, suggesting instead that it is due to the rapid expansion of CDs.


Passage number 515.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One significant indicator--and I feelit's going to be with us for a while--is that it's very hard now toget term money in the Eurodollar market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the difficulty of obtaining term money in the Eurodollar market.


Passage number 516.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless you're a Swiss bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a conditional statement that does not involve any contradicting or conflicting views.


Passage number 517.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm talking about the U.S. banks.The maturities have shortened, and it's very significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the maturities of U.S. banks shortening, without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 518.
MR. ROBERTS. But in that context, the banks have expandedtheir loans tremendously, and have financed it with expansion ofdomestic CDs. That is my point. And you would expect that to resultin a widening of spreads, notwithstanding the fact that, obviously,Continental and Manufacturers Hanover have been a qualitative factorin the market. The market really, I guess, has worked pretty well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Roberts explaining his point about the expansion of bank loans and financing, without expressing disagreement or engaging in an argument.


Passage number 519.
MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems that the banks have not only hadto finance their domestic operations but apparently also theirbranches abroad, because those have no longer brought in money but7/16-17/84apparently have needed money. That suggests that there are thosefunding problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or observation about banks needing to finance their branches abroad.


Passage number 520.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to have a prolongeddiscussion right now because we need to get on; we can discuss it alittle later if you want. But just symptomatic of this, among otherthings, the Comptroller has developed a new plan for evaluating oilloans, which may not be overly conservative in some theoretical orabstract sense. But there is a certain fear--I don't know about this,but it needs some testing--that application of those standards tonational oil credits will result in billions of dollars of loans beingput in classified status because they won't pass the stiffer hurdlethat's implied by the new evaluation. The only sense we have of thatin a direct measurable sense is that they have done it to Continentaland it has added $200 to $300 million to their classified items in abank that already has had its oil portfolio examined and reexamined.At one point I heard a figure of $350 million. Maybe you know thefigure as a result of the examination.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the potential consequences of applying new evaluation standards to national oil credits, but there is no direct disagreement or debate mentioned.


Passage number 521.
MR. PARTEE. No, I don't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion without any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 522.
MR. KEEHN. It's in that magnitude. The loss category forContinental, including oil credits, is going to be $575 million. Andthat is largely the result of a different set of standards forcredits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about the loss category for Continental and how it is largely the result of different standards for credits.


Passage number 523.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's loss since the last examination,which was 6 months ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact that there has been loss since the last examination that occurred 6 months ago.


Passage number 524.
MR. KEEHN. Right. That's as opposed to the deterioration ofthe assets themselves; it's a very significant amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a statement about the significance of the amount of deterioration of assets.


Passage number 525.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can return to these questions,but I just don't want to interrupt the continuity of the marketdiscussion entirely. Are there any other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion and a desire to not completely disrupt the ongoing market discussion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 526.
MR. PARTEE. It is true, isn't it, that we've had a couple ofbad bank reports. certainly couldn't have been much worse than itwas and looks like a continuing problem, and it doesn't seemto have shaken the market any more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there have been bad bank reports and suggests that the situation is not improving. However, they argue that despite this, the market does not seem to be affected much. This implies a disagreement on whether the bad bank reports should have had a greater impact on the market.


Passage number 527.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The shareholders, who are very strongin both those cases, are putting up more capital and the markets knowthis. assures us that they bent over backwards to write offeverything and reserve everything they possibly could. And they aregoing to show a substantial profit this quarter. And I think $80million more capital was put up. Also, of course, we know thatMidland is now offering to buy out the minority shareholders inCrocker and has a complete commitment to Crocker. So, that's why itdidn't really get hurt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating various facts and opinions about the shareholders, their actions, and the potential impact on Crocker.


Passage number 528.
MR. MEEK. My sense is that some of the anxiety that waspresent in the markets in late June has gone out of the market sincethen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates that there is no contention or disagreement. It simply presents the opinion of Mr. Meek, stating that some anxiety has decreased in the markets since late June.


Passage number 529.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] I think is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 530.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Temporarily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "temporarily" by itself does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply refers to a temporary situation or condition.


Passage number 531.
-53-7/16-17/84MR. WALLICH. Paul, could I ask you a question. The last fewweeks seem to have produced an example of the relative workings of aborrowed reserves target or assumption versus a net free reservestarget or assumption. We seem to have stuck more or less with aborrowed reserves assumption. That has led to an increase in net freereserves. So, had we been on a net free reserves target, that wouldhave led to higher borrowings and tighter policies. Is that thecorrect way of looking at this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply explaining a situation and discussing different scenarios. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 532.
MR. MEEK. I think that's a fair statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the statement and does not present any opposing views.


Passage number 533.
MR. WALLICH. So there is a difference between the twopolicies and, in this particular case, it has meant an easierapproach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is simply stating that there is a difference between the two policies and that, in this particular case, one of the policies has resulted in an easier approach.


Passage number 534.
MR. MEEK. Well, it has allowed us to accommodate somewhatthe extraordinary demand for excess reserves by the major banks earlyin the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about how the demand for excess reserves by major banks was accommodated.


Passage number 535.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we hadn't accommodated theextraordinary demand for excess reserves, we would have gotten evenmore of a rise. The Committee last time assumed that a billion dollarborrowing assumption was going to give us [a funds rate] in theneighborhood of 10-3/4 percent. Instead, we ended up with 11 to11-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating what would have happened if they hadn't accommodated the demand for excess reserves and clarifying the Committee's previous assumption versus the actual outcome.


Passage number 536.
MR. WALLICH. That's what I say. It was an easier policyand, given that interest rates were rising anyway, was preferable to apolicy that would have driven rates up more. I just want to bring outthe analytical difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is expressing his opinion and explaining his reasoning, but there is no indication of any disagreement or argument with another party.


Passage number 537.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other comments, we havesome transactions to ratify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that if there are no other comments, they have some transactions to ratify.


Passage number 538.
MR. MARTIN. Move the ratification.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is asking for someone to move for the ratification of something, and the speaker responds by seconding. Both statements seem to be in agreement with each other.


Passage number 539.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll go to Mr. Axilrod and then to acoffee break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply stating the order in which people will speak and when there will be a break. There is no contention or disagreement presented in this statement.


Passage number 540.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I can be very brief. AlternativeB is the alternative that assumes the continuation of a billiondollars of borrowing. We believe the general constellation of moneymarket and other conditions that go with that reserve increase wouldbe consistent with rather moderate M1 growth from June to September--on the order of around 5-1/2 percent. That growth rate would bringthe growth in M1 from Q4 to September down to 7 percent and we believethat would be on a reasonable track, hopefully, if the Committee sowished, to end the year close to around 6-1/2 percent growth. Wewould expect, and of course it's only an expectation, that thatparticular constellation would involve about the current level ofinterest rates and that this level of interest rates has somerestraint in it that would carry forward into the fourth quarter.Alternative A suggests dropping the level of borrowing initially, byabout $250 million or so from the $1 billion, and borrowing underAlternative C is commensurately higher. If attitudes with respect tothe federal funds market and bank markets in general stay as they are,-54-7/16-17/84we would expect Alternative B to involve a funds rate around 11percent or a little higher; Alternative A would have funds moving downcloser to 10-1/2 percent and Alternative C moving up closer to 12percent. As Mr. Meek suggested, these attitudes could change. Ifthey did ease off and banks were viewed more favorably, or if themoney supply came in on what the market interprets as the reasonableside so that expectations of a monetary policy tightening edged off,or if the GNP data were weak, then the funds rate [pressures] couldalso probably subside some. In any event, Alternative B does have afunds rate range of 8 to 12 percent and Alternative A has a range of7-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent. The present range is 7-1/2 to 11-1/2percent. We've suggested that somewhat higher range in connectionwith the billion dollars of borrowing, simply to reflect the shifts inattitudes that have occurred in the past two or three weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing different alternatives and their potential effects on the funds rate and M1 growth. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 541.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's have a coffee break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Well, let's have a coffee break" does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests taking a break to have coffee.


Passage number 542.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] about the perspectivewith which I, at least, approach this operational decision we have tomake. This has somewhat more importance, I'm afraid, than worryingabout the long-term ranges that we've been debating, anyway. I thinkwe are at a critical point from a number of directions. I don't haveany doubt about that; how much influence we can have is anothermatter. I am struck by the problems in the banking system. Wetouched upon that a few moments ago. As I understand the situation, Ithink the funding abilities of the multinational banks are virtuallyuniformly stretched. Psychologically, I think none of them has greatconfidence that they can do more funding than they are doing in anysubstantial amount. One evidence of that is the way [investors] allran away from Continental even when they thought it was in bettershape than, in fact, it was. Nobody was prepared, when they thoughtabout it, to take on the funding risk that would be involved even forthe biggest bank in the United States, even in considerably shrunkenform. I think there is no doubt that they are all worried about theirfunding in varying degrees. In fact, it's probably not too much tosay that a good many depositors would just as soon get out of bankpaper if they knew where to go. If they don't know quite where to go,some of it hangs more than it otherwise would on customerrelationships and all the rest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's perspective on the current situation in the banking system.


Passage number 543.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They're going to have more of anopportunity now with the abolition of the withholding tax.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating that there will be more opportunity with the abolition of the withholding tax.


Passage number 544.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe. I do feel fairly confident thatthese problems aren't going to go away for a very simple reason. Theyreflect the fact that there are a lot of weak credits in the bankingsystem. And they seem to be coming more into the open rather than thereverse--even discounting the LDC problem which, of course, sits thereas the most looming threat. I might say, as a side point, that myimpression is that they are adding to the weak credits in the bankingsystem with new loans every day. I'm not full of pride about thesupervisory performance of the United States in general or the FederalReserve in particular. It's a very difficult area, but I think it'ssomething that we have to concern ourselves with a lot more. Oneaspect of that is the holding company situation. When there is acondition of crisis, as with Continental Illinois, we find out that we-55-7/16-17/84don't have a very good handle on the holding company and how it isfunded and how its assets match up with its liabilities. We justhaven't been analyzing these things in this way. One doesn't imaginethat they would ever get into this kind of difficulty, but we're atthe point where they are in this kind of difficulty, and I think wehave to do some rethinking in that area. I might say in thatconnection that this is not entirely a side issue in terms of monetarypolicy. We are going to be raising the capital ratios for holdingcompanies and banks and the FDIC and Comptroller have already madesome announcements in that direction. It's not final yet, but this isgoing to be done in the next week or so. We will be talking aboutmoving toward a more building-block approach with respect to capitalin the holding companies. Now, apart from the supervisoryimplications of that coming at this particular time--while the move isnot drastic in the sense that most of the multinational holdingcompanies will be able to meet the new capital ratios of 5-1/2percent, which I presume is where it will end up--some of them aren'tgoing to be very far above it. And I think there will probably be alittle accompanying music [suggesting] that this is another steptoward still higher ratios in the future. The net result, I think,moves in the direction of restraint on asset growth. It may even bemore potent than monetary policy--at least if we did it a little moreaggressively--at this particular point in time. So, that's just somebackground.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Instead, the speaker is expressing their concerns and opinions about the weak credits in the banking system and the need for better analysis and supervision. They also discuss potential changes to capital ratios for holding companies and the potential impact on asset growth. There is no mention of differing viewpoints or debates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 545.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Two of the banks are going to fallshort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "Two of the banks are going to fall short" suggests that there will be a disagreement or conflict regarding the performance or success of these two banks.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 546.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know; two or three will fallshort, I think. will certainly fall short.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "two or three will fall short" suggests that the speaker believes that there will not be enough of something, while the phrase "will certainly fall short" implies that the speaker is certain about the lack of something. Therefore, there is a contradiction between the speaker's two statements, indicating disagreement or contention.


Passage number 547.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Vice Chairman Solomon without providing any context or information about any potential contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 548.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. was getting there; I forgetwhether they were there. But I think most banks will want to get morecomfortably above the new ratio than they are at the moment, sothere's a degree of pressure there.Looking at the rest of the financial climate: We referred abit to the problems abroad. I don't have anything to add to what Isaid earlier about the problems of the developed countries. Let mejust say a word about the LDC problem. I don't think there is anyquestion that the general psychological attitude in LDCs hasdeteriorated in terms of the determination to adjust and pay theirdebts. The focus of that, of course, is in Argentina. It's a littlehard to tell what is happening in Argentina now. It's rather at animpasse. But that feeling has affected other countries, even thoughwe can show objectively that countries like Mexico and Venezuela andBrazil are doing better than expected. It is not just an economicproblem but an increasingly difficult political problem. This lastincrease in the prime rate coming one day after the Cartagena meetingconvened, when there was a great effort to restrain the radicals inLatin America, hit our friends like a kick in the solar plexus interms of keeping the political situation under control. I'm notsaying, certainly not economically, that some further increase ininterest rates in the United States follows like night after day. Butthat situation falls apart. I don't think that is true economicallybut politically I think we are increasingly close to margins of-56-7/16-17/84tolerance. The significance of that, of course, is partly that itfeeds back into our domestic credit situation and the confidence inour own banking system. Now we have that whole set of problems. It'sa set of problems we have not seen the likes of, in my opinion, sincethe early 1930s or late 1920s. One of the reasons we have the problemis that it has been so long since we've had it that no bankers couldimagine it was going to happen again. So they went out perfectlyhappily and got rid of all their liquidity and filled up the balancesheet with less-than-strong loans.When you look at the real side of the economy, as I saidyesterday and I guess the view is widely shared around here, there isjust a lot of plain forward momentum. I see very little [slowing],except possibly in housing, and that's not clear. We get a housingstarts figure tomorrow. I did see a builder survey yesterday thatshows a further decline in sales; it was an attitudinal thing--traffic, sales prospects, and all the rest, which continues the trendthat started two or three months ago in a fairly decided way. Butthat's a limited piece of evidence. Generally, I think the momentumis very strong in the domestic economy and is propelled by a lot offactors. If I were just sitting here looking at that without any ofthe financial problems, I wouldn't have much doubt about what I woulddo within the limits of monetary policy. I would be more restrictivebecause, just looking at that, I think that's where the risks lie.When I look at the financial system, I get quite a different pictureof what maneuverability we have. To put it another way, I do think wehave something of a knife's edge problem. If we are too easy, thenthis momentum in the economy will be excessive and will materialize inmore strength than we'd like to see. If we are too tight, it mightpull out the rug from the whole thing in a rather sudden way due tothe financial concerns. I hope the knife has a dull edge rather thana sharp edge, but dull or sharp, it's not very easy to keep on aknife's edge. In a sense, I think we're coming close to running outof maneuvering room in terms of monetary policy alone. I don'tconclude from this, as I guess I implied, that any kind of easingsignal is justified or appropriate. But I do conclude, giveneverything we know at the moment, including that for the moment themonetary aggregates look reasonably quiescent, that it's not time totake a strong initiative in the restraining direction. So, thatreduces the choices, in my mind, to a fairly narrow range. I am notsaying that there is no room for some tightening down the road if themomentum of the economy continues and the aggregates move high and allthe rest. I'm not saying [we wouldn't ease]--although I find thispretty far-fetched--if something happens that makes the economy on itsown look considerably weaker. I really don't expect that. I do notdiscount the possibility of more financial stringency and difficultiesthat could arise from any number of directions, most likely from theLDC side. But it could arise from purely domestic or even developedcountry concerns. All of this leads me in terms of specifics tosomething like not doing very much right now, but remaining poised totighten a little if we have to in terms of what happens down the roadin the coming weeks. I guess I'll stop right there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the momentum in the domestic economy is strong and would lean towards being more restrictive in terms of monetary policy. However, when considering the financial system and potential risks, the speaker believes that being too tight could have negative consequences. This creates a dilemma or disagreement on the appropriate course of action.


Passage number 549.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At the risk of sounding "me too-ish,"that's exactly my view of it. I think we should not tighten further;we should simply consolidate the tightening that has taken place inthe market. And we should certainly not ease. So, it seems to methat alternative B is what is indicated. I might argue--and this is a-57-7/16-17/84nitpick--that on M3 I'm not sure it makes sense to put in 9-1/2percent instead of 9 percent when 9 percent is the upper end [of thelong-run range] and we're running over that. I don't know whetherthat one-quarter period is significant enough to aim for somethingthat's over. But, with the exception of that nitpick, I would go with[alternative B]--$1 billion for borrowing and moving the funds rangeup that extra 1/2 point to 8 to 12 percent. I assume that the generallanguage would permit room so that if the banks relax further and $1billion of borrowing ends up giving us something in the neighborhoodof 10-3/4 percent [for the funds rate], there would be flexibility totighten a little so that we stay in that 11 or 11 plus percent range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their view and provides some minor questioning or nitpicking but ultimately agrees with alternative B.


Passage number 550.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just clarify one thing. I said Ithink the aggregates are quiescent for the moment; that's based uponwhat information we have and estimates for July. And, of course, thelast couple of weeks of July are a guess, but the first two or threeweeks of July look like they're not really above the June average.So, we could have a reasonably low July figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their thoughts and observations based on available information and estimates.


Passage number 551.
MR. ROBERTS. Wasn't June rather high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply inquiring about the elevation of June.


Passage number 552.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no doubt that June was on the highside; the average with July may not look too bad. May was high butthe average with April was not out of line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about different months but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 553.
MR. BLACK. You were saying the level was approximately whatit was in June rather than the rate of growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply stating a fact and making a comparison between the level and the rate of growth.


Passage number 554.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Oh. I'm not saying the 12 percentrate of growth, I'm saying [the level].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 555.
MR. BLACK. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement by Mr. Black, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 556.
 I think maybe Ted thought--MR. ROBERTS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 557.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks pretty safe that it will come inat what, Steve--about a 5 percent rate of growth or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses confidence in the prediction of a 5 percent rate of growth or less, without any conflicting opinions or opposition.


Passage number 558.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, and we'd need an increase in the secondhalf of July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no expression of disagreement or contention in the passage. It simply states that an increase is needed in the second half of July.


Passage number 559.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would need a substantial increase inthe second half to get it up to 4 or 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. It is a statement presenting a need for a significant increase in the second half to achieve a certain target growth percentage.


Passage number 560.
MR. BOEHNE. The analysis that has been given is one that Ifeel comfortable with. The real side of things would tend to lead onein the direction of some snugging up. But I think the problems on thefinancial side are sufficiently scary that they put a constraint onthat. So, about where we are seems to make a lot of sense to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, expresses his agreement with the analysis that has been given and states that the current situation makes sense to him.


Passage number 561.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 562.
MR. MARTIN. I would certainly subscribe to the Chairman'ssummary analysis of where we stand. I'd support the status quo. I'mnot sure whether alternative B is that entirely; I will in a minutecomment on those numbers for the aggregates. In support of theChairman's position about the evidence of some precariousness in thefinancial system, I remind the Committee of the size of the largest-58-7/16-17/84savings and loan holding company, the Financial Corporation ofAmerica, which is now at about $32 billion with 80 plus percent of itsdeposits purchased, and the FSLIC insurance fund is running at $6billion or so. I would name also the[all of] which the FDIC has indicated it willmove on promptly. And we're talking about assets of $5.6 billion at$6.6 billion at and $7.5 billion atAdd that to the ongoing negotiations with Continentaland you get some interesting arithmetic. Let's not run the signalflag up the mast, but the arithmetic [indicates] that there iscertainly a vulnerability. The small banks have those agriculturalloans, which are not improving. Well, there's no point in goingthrough the risks; the Chairman has subsumed them in his comments.I would hope that in the implementation of alternative Bthere will be flexibility, frankly, on the accommodative side. I havea slight difference from previous commentators in that I think therisks are rather imminent. And I would hope that the usual good senseis applied by the people at the Desk and the people here, as wasevidenced in the very recent past so that as these crises develop andas the attitudinal waves pass through the money and capital markets,there will be flexibility on the accommodative side, which hopefullywe can pick up coming round the barn, so to speak. We should all beaware, if alternative B is the consensus here, that relative to theMarch-to-June pace for M1 and M2 we're talking of moving from an 8-1/4percent M1--I believe my numbers are right here--to 5-1/2 percent onM1. We're talking about M2 moving from something like 10-1/4 percentMarch-to-June to 7-1/2 percent. To me, that's too much. So, I'msomewhere between "A" and "B." I don't want to give the false signalsof trying to soften interest rates that A implies, if I read thiscorrectly. Nevertheless, I'm uncomfortable that we're bringing theseaggregates down too fast as implied in "B." So it seems to me that weshould give authority toward "B" but--yes, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for the Chairman's position and suggesting some flexibility in implementing "alternative B." They also express concern about the risks and vulnerability in the financial system. Overall, the tone is cooperative and there is no clear disagreement or contention.


Passage number 563.
MR. AXILROD. You gave the M3 growth. That was 10.2 percent;M2 was quite a lot lower than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating two pieces of information, the M3 growth rate and the lower M2 rate. There is no indication of disagreement or conflict between the two pieces of information.


Passage number 564.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, there's something the matter with M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests that there is something wrong with M2 without providing any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 565.
MR. MARTIN. Oh. What is it for the March[-to-June period].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is simply asking a question.


Passage number 566.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just have the monthly figures here.Well, it was a quarterly growth rate of about 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the information they have, which is the monthly figures and the quarterly growth rate of about 7 percent.


Passage number 567.
MR. MARTIN. Oh, all right. I'm sorry. So it's true for M1but not M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 568.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, the figure you gave was for [M3].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The person simply acknowledges that the figure provided is accurate.


Passage number 569.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The quarterly average for monthly rates of6.9, 8.7, and 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating the quarterly average of monthly rates.


Passage number 570.
3 percent--MR. MARTIN. I stand corrected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that they made a mistake and corrects themselves.


Passage number 571.
MR. KOHN. It's 7.7 percent for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a numerical value without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 572.
MR. MARTIN. For the three months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions the name "Mr. Martin" and the time frame of "three months," but it does not provide any information or context that indicates any form of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 573.
-59-7/16-17/84MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the statement "MR. AXILROD" which suggests that there is a conversation or interaction happening between multiple individuals, indicating the possibility of differing opinions or arguments.


Passage number 574.
MR. MARTIN. So, I'm an "A to B" type, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Martin is stating a characteristic about himself, namely that he is an "A to B" type. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 575.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What are you on borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 576.
MR. MARTIN. I'd like to see the borrowing at $1 billion but,as the difficulties develop, I'd like to see if we could go to $900 to$1 billion. In other words, Tony, I'm arguing for a littleflexibility on the accommodative side because I take these risks andthese vulnerabilities very seriously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Martin is expressing his personal preference for a borrowing amount of $1 billion but suggests the possibility of lowering it to $900 million to $1 billion. He is advocating for flexibility and acknowledging the seriousness of the risks and vulnerabilities. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 577.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the answer you're looking for.


Passage number 578.
MR. WALLICH. Well, we seem to be close to the situationwhere the central bank has the choice of facing the threat of afinancial debacle or risking inflation. It's something that has oftenbeen talked about, but it never looked quite as stark and immediate asnow. On the side of forbearance and status quo, one could argue thatwe've had a rise in interest rates and its effects may not be fullyembodied in our projections. It may slow down the economy. There arefinancial difficulties that may be on the rise and may themselvesexert a restraining effect on the real sector. So it seems notunjustified to wait and consolidate, as Tony said, the recent interestrate increases. But, of course, there is the risk that if theaggregates and inflation expectations do expand, then the need to actis only postponed and the level of action may have to be higher. Sixweeks or twelve weeks from now we may be sitting here and wish we haddone a little now in order to forestall the need for more later. Onething that leaves me unsure about the proper action is that, with$1 billion of borrowing, the funds rate may drop back to the 10 to 11percent range from the 10-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent range, and I thinkthat would be a mistake--to give a signal of the rate dropping. Ifthe present relationship of $1 billion of borrowing and 11 to 11-1/4percent holds, that would be a reasonable thing to do. But I wouldthen want to see flexibility in our assumptions with respect to excessreserves that would offset any effect of $1 billion of borrowing inthe direction of depressing the funds rate. On the aggregates, all Ihave to say is that "B" seems consonant with these generalpropositions, and I have no particular exception to make with "B,"always bearing in mind that the projected funds rate there is 11 to11-1/4 percent. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is discussing different perspectives and potential risks, but he does not express disagreement with anyone's viewpoints.


Passage number 579.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflict, disagreement, or opposing views.


Passage number 580.
MR. ROBERTS. Well, I think there is a time to do somesnugging, and there's a difference between snugging and a gross move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their belief that there is a difference between "snugging" and a "gross move."


Passage number 581.
What I would like to see is sort of a "B+", which would be somethinglike a 5 percent growth from June-to-September because--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a "B-" in the normal nomenclature.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their desired outcome and explaining their reasoning using a grading scale analogy.


Passage number 582.
MR. ROBERTS. Well, "B-," if you want to call it that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roberts simply addresses someone as "B-" and suggests using that term if they prefer it.


Passage number 583.
MR. MARTIN. I like the first story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker, Mr. Martin, likes the first story.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 584.
MR. ROBERTS. I think of that as a "B+." I note that thequarterly average under "B," in fact, accelerates to 7.7 percent. And7/16-17/84I think we ought to be raising the borrowing target modestly to, say,$1-1/4 billion, so that there is less opportunity to spill overinadvertently into a rapid growth in money as we maintain a borrowingtarget and provide reserves to get used and transferred into money. Ithink the momentum of the economy fully justifies this and I think themarket has probably already significantly discounted something likethis together with an increase in the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roberts suggests raising the borrowing target, while it is not mentioned if anyone else agrees or disagrees with this suggestion.


Passage number 585.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 586.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I support your position. I thinkthe evidence does suggest that the economy is decelerating. Theleading indicators available for June suggest a further slowing aheadof us. If we were in the situation where the evidence clearlysuggested the opposite, the decision would be a lot more difficult.But, I would certainly support alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 587.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not provide any information about Mr. Forrestal, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 588.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, like a lot of other people,I've been waiting expectantly for some moderation in the growth of theeconomy. And while we've had some, the question is whether thatmoderation is enough. In my judgment, it isn't. I think that theeconomy at the moment is growing too fast to be sustained and thatunder normal circumstances such conditions in the economy wouldsuggest that we ought to be doing something affirmatively to brake theeconomy somewhat. Even interest-sensitive sectors of the economy,with the possible exception of housing, are not really showing mucheffect from higher interest rates. On the other hand, we are notseeing inflation, as evidenced by the fact that commodity prices andgold and the price of the dollar are not indicating inflationaryexpectations on the horizon. However, some of that at least can beexplained by exchange differentials. Ordinarily, because of thosefactors and believing as I do that we ought to be taking some firmingaction, I would like to see us somewhere between "B" and "C,"--a "B-"or "C+"-- with borrowing at around $1.2 billion. Now, I don't knowwhether that degree of snugging, if that's what it is, would reallyexacerbate the financial situation domestically and internationally.I, too, have a lot of concern about what is happening. So, if thatsituation is as dire as you have indicated, then I would be happy withalternative B. The real concern that I have is that both of theseproblems--certainly the LDC problem and the domestic financialsituation--are going to be with us for some time. These are nottemporary problems. So, the question is: How long can we wait beforewe do something and how long are we going to be constrained by theseforces.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their own judgment and concerns but does not argue against any opposing views or opinions.


Passage number 589.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just comment on that: Perhaps fora long time. I think the obvious economic policy approach in theseconditions--where we are getting too much strength in the real economyand we have the financial difficulties--is tightening up on fiscalpolicy. I can't rub my genie to produce that, but the inability toproduce it doesn't say there's another answer. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement by the speaker expressing their view on what the appropriate economic policy approach should be in the given conditions. It does not involve any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 590.
MR. GRAMLEY. I agree with Tony's and Henry's version of "B":Use the specs of "B" and if, in fact, we see some different attitudesof borrowing develop, inch up on the borrowing number rather than letinterest rates go down. I do think, from a macro standpoint, that our-61-7/16-17/84real concern is that this slowdown in economic activity which thestaff foresees, and which I could foresee also, may or may not happen.It is still primarily a forecast. The concrete signs of that areprecious and slim at this point. We have to keep hoping that it willoccur. And if it doesn't occur and we have upward pressure oninterest rates, then we're going to have some very, very seriousproblems about what we should do. Henry is right: The choice for theshort run is either more inflation or a financial debacle. I thinkthe best we can do about this is not to let inflation happen, but justto hold to a rather steady, sensible policy. And if we don't get somebudget restraint, then there's going to be no way to avoid this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Gramley agrees with Tony and Henry's version of "B" but expresses concerns about the potential slowdown in economic activity. He suggests that if there is upward pressure on interest rates, there could be serious problems and presents two possible choices for the short run: more inflation or a financial debacle. This indicates disagreement and uncertainty about the best course of action.


Passage number 591.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Partee without providing any context or information about any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 592.
MR. PARTEE. I would accept alternative B also. I'mconsiderably affected by the moderate numbers projected in alternativeB and would remind you that they are projections. If, in fact, theeconomy doesn't begin to slow as everybody is hoping, the numbers maywell be higher than that. And if they're higher than that, then Ithink we'll have to take some action. I'm as concerned about thefinancial situation as anybody but, as I said yesterday, I feel thatthe real problem would come from having an excessive expansion thatleads to inflation that [in turn] leads to significantly higherinterest rates, which would not just take [down] the FinancialCorporation of America but about 100 other savings and loans with it.I guess I wouldn't do anything to try to save Financial Corporation orBowery or somebody like that if what I were doing was risking losing agreat many more further on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses a personal preference for alternative B and mentions potential risks and consequences associated with taking action to save specific financial institutions. However, there is no indication of disagreement or debate with any other individuals or viewpoints.


Passage number 593.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which particular institution is savable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 594.
MR. PARTEE. So, I would pay a lot of attention to theperformance of the aggregates in this period. I don't like to fine-tune the funds rate. I'm shocked that Henry is fine-tuning it to 1/2of a point, because I always thought he believed that we ought to runon more basic things than just the funds rate. But I guess maybe it'sbecause he doesn't want it to go down and that's why he would fine-tune it. But I would say that if it flexed down, I wouldn't have anyproblem with that. In that sense, I guess I join Pres. I don't wantto bias the result. I'd take $1 billion [on borrowing] and the specsof alternative B, and if the funds rate happens to move down 1/4 oreven 1/2 point to where it was just a few weeks ago, I wouldn't haveany great problem with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his own views and does not directly challenge or disagree with anyone else.


Passage number 595.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 596.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have a strong preference for theaggregate targets in alternative C. As I mentioned before when Ilatched on to what Lyle was saying, I think it's vital that wecontinue our stated long-run policy of working the aggregates down.There are obviously risks if we try to push M1 down too fast afterthis rate of expansion, but I think there are also risks if we let itgrow at a rate of 7-1/2 percent for the last half of the year as itdid in the first half. And I hope, of course--and I even have somefaint expectations--that the rate of growth in the economy will slowsomewhat so it won't be necessary for us to take any action to try todeal with the aggregates. I'm very much encouraged by Steve'sprojection of M1. So, despite my ordinary predilections to do a-62-7/16-17/84little now in the hopes of avoiding a more disruptive and strongermove later on, I would stick with the $1 billion borrowing target nowand raise that only if the aggregates show greater strength than itnow appears that they're showing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black expresses his preference for the aggregate targets in alternative C and discusses the risks associated with different rates of growth in M1. He also mentions his hope that the rate of growth in the economy will slow, indicating a desire for stability. Overall, there is no mention of conflicting opinions or disagreement among the individuals in this passage.


Passage number 597.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions the name "Mr. Corrigan," which does not contain any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 598.
MR. CORRIGAN. I'll stick with the Solomon/Gramley version ofalternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their preference for a particular version or option.


Passage number 599.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the given passage "Mr. Guffey" does not provide any information for determining whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 600.
MR. GUFFEY. I also would go with what Jerry justcharacterized as the Solomon/Gramley version. I have a concern aboutthe uncertainty with respect to the $1 billion borrowing and itsrelationship to the current interest rate levels of 11 to 11-1/4percent. Because of that uncertainty, then, I would focus more uponthat [funds rate] itself, whether that's fine-tuning--Chuck'sterminology--or not. We haven't had good evidence of a slowing of the[growth in the] economy yet, which I think all of us would like tosee. The market essentially has taken us there, but for policypurposes it would seem to me more appropriate to focus on a federalfunds rate because of that uncertainty in the period ahead. In otherwords, I would not let it go up or let it go down below the 11 percentlevel. It also says to me that if that's the general consensus, thereshould not be a movement in the discount rate, which is on the tablebefore the Board. That's simply because if we follow the usualprocedures, a 1/2 percentage point increase--if that were the number--would imply a 1/2 point increase in the funds rate level, which Ithink would be quite inappropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey disagrees with the idea of focusing on the federal funds rate and instead argues for keeping it at the current level of 11 percent. He also disagrees with the potential increase in the discount rate and argues that it would be inappropriate to raise the funds rate in response.


Passage number 601.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided in the question.


Passage number 602.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would come out probably at"B-." I recognize the very real risks that you described, and theyare real. On the other hand, I think there are risks on the otherside. A perception that we were accommodating a lot of things couldbe almost as bad. I think, as Ted said, the markets have discountedquite a bit. I could see certainly holding where we are and maybeslightly more restraint. I would be inclined to go even fartherexcept for the fact that our next meeting is coming up fairly soon andwe will have another opportunity to discuss it and, obviously, we'llknow more then than we know now. On the borrowing level, I'd probablyopt for about $1.2 billion or $1.25 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the risks on both sides but ultimately suggests a course of action.


Passage number 603.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without any context or specific passage provided, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the mentioned passage.


Passage number 604.
MS. SEGER. What I see is a difference of opinion between theSun Belt and the Rust Bowl. Coming from the Rust Bowl, as I saidearlier, I think the economy does show signs of slowing--not that wehave gone into a decline, certainly, but the rate of growth isslowing. Also, I don't feel that the participants in the economy havefully adjusted to the interest rate increases we've had so far--forexample, the last increase in the prime rate, which was rather recent.Business people don't adjust overnight and not even in a week or twoweeks; I think we have to factor that in. Also, like the Chairman,I'm extremely concerned about the condition of banks. I don't thinkit's just Continental. Out in the other states there are banks with-63-7/16-17/84problems and there are also tremendous problems with the thrifts. Theones that squeaked through the '81-'82 period by holding their breathhave certainly had a little chance to get healthy, but they need moretime to get healthy. And even with that 25 basis point increase onwhat they have to pay for funds we're going to have a lot of them inthe soup very quickly. Also, there are tremendous consumer risks. Ihaven't heard this pointed out, I don't believe, but more and moreconsumer loans have become variable rate loans. While that has helpedthe financial institutions get rid of some of their interest raterisk, it has also enhanced the credit risk by a great deal. I thinkmany consumers don't realize what they signed on for. I'm not justtalking about ARMs; there are other kinds of variable rate consumerloans--car loans, etc. And I think there is tremendous vulnerabilityas I look at this whole package here. So, if I had to vote for "A,""B," or "C," I would go along with the "B" [specifications] and withthe idea that the fed funds rate could range around 11 percent. Idon't think financial market participants would think we had gottensloppily easy if the fed funds rate were to drop, say, to 10-3/4percent on a given day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents the speaker's perspective and concerns about the economy and financial institutions.


Passage number 605.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're going to have to vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the reader will have to vote without providing any conflicting perspectives or arguments.


Passage number 606.
MS. SEGER. Yes, I'm voting for "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 607.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't have to vote right now, butyou're going to have to vote either for it or against it at somepoint. I'm kidding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any form of disagreement or contention. It is a statement that presents a future choice without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 608.
MS. SEGER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is "yes". The presence of the word "yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 609.
MR. BALLES. I generally support the position you outlined,Mr. Chairman, although my inclinations are to lean toward tighteningbecause of a fear of inflation down the road. I'm also very muchconcerned about avoiding any rocking of the boat in the near future ifwe can avoid it. So I come out for "B" with the proviso that GovernorGramley added.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 610.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Governor Rice" on its own does not provide any information or context to suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 611.
MR. RICE. I would support the Solomon/Gramley version ofalternative B. And I hope it finds a knife's edge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker clearly states their support for the Solomon/Gramley version of alternative B and expresses hope that it will be successful.


Passage number 612.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You have to wear gum shoes when I saythat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 613.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 614.
MR. KEEHN. Maybe I'm missing something, but it does seem tobe that there's a bit of a divergence of opinion around the table asto whether or not we have an overheated economy or one that is movingalong quite well. For the reasons I stated yesterday, I fall in thelatter category. I think the numbers are good and they're solid; butit's very, very uneven, particularly in the industrial sector. As aconsequence, I would be very reluctant to see us make a move towardsnugging at this particular point for that reason and for the reasonsthat you suggested at the beginning. Importantly, also, I think myoutlook for inflation is perhaps a bit more positive than some. Ijust don't see in the current signs or the prospective signs that-64-7/16-17/84inflation really is likely to get away from us. So, as a consequence,I really do think this is good time to maintain a course that seems tobe working. I would be in favor of alternative B with borrowing at alevel of about $1.0 to $1.1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Keehn acknowledges that there may be differing opinions about whether the economy is overheating or moving along well, but he states his own opinion and reasons for it without contesting or disagreeing with others. He also expresses his outlook for inflation and his preference for maintaining the current course, but again, without entering into a disagreement.


Passage number 615.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as the given information "Mrs. Horn" does not provide enough context for analysis.


Passage number 616.
MS. HORN. By year-end I'd very much like to come out at themidpoint of our M1 range. That would tie into all the longer-termkinds of considerations we were discussing earlier about what shouldhappen to those ranges. And that would cause me to choose somethingin the area of "B-," with a slight increase in the borrowingassumption, up to as high as $1.2 billion. I do that, of course, witha considerable amount of discomfort because I think the financialstrains that have been enumerated are very real and very serious. Butthe knife's edge has been referred to a number of times, and I thinkthe strength in the economy and that need for a long-term policy arealso very present.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 617.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would be sorely tempted, if we wereoperating the way the Open Market Committee operated 10 or 15 yearsago, to say "Thank you, we have a consensus. Goodbye." I'm afraid wehave to be a little more nitpicky. We're down to nuances. Just to beclear, I don't mean to suggest myself that we can do much about thesefinancial problems by these minor decisions. But, in the range we'retalking about, they're not going to go away if we stand pat; and inthe range that we're talking about, all these domestic things aren'tgoing to suddenly collapse on us. The international situation, atsome point, might collapse in the range in which we're talking. Butit's a question of how much justification we need, in some sense, totake an overt step at this stage. And I think we need a little morethan usual.There is obviously some small difference of opinion here; Isuspect the prevailing view is what has been referred to as theSolomon/Gramley approach. I interpret that as: We don't do much now;we'd be very cautious about anything interpreted as any easing; and wemight have to tighten if things come in stronger. I referred to theeconomy as having a lot of momentum; I may be wrong. I'm not sure Ifully see all the slowing down so far in domestic demand, but M1 looksfairly quiescent in July. It could be anything in August. I wouldn'tdrop out of my seat if August came in with some very high numbers, inwhich case we may have to respond. But then we would have theevidence of that in front of us.Now, how do we put this in terms of a directive. I think thenumbers are simple enough. We are really talking about thealternative B numbers. Some people said they were a little in-betweenbut the only real difference, described as a quibble about the number,is whether we make M3 9-1/4 percent--which is an odd number to put inthe directive anyway--or 9 percent. Let me say that this is no bigdeal with me, but in the interest of rounding, maybe 9 percent is theappropriate number to put in there. Does that make sense to people.I guess we are talking about 8 to 12 percent [on the funds range]. Idon't think that affects the substance, but it will affect the visualsof this when and if it's announced. And I don't know how hard-pressedI'm going to be in testimony to indicate some of this. I don'tinterpret [raising the funds rate range to] 8 to 12 percent as meaning-65-7/16-17/84anything significant, but the market or certain Congressmen will.That does not say, given that the rate is between 11 and 11-1/2percent, that we should not do that. But I just note that that willbe interpreted by some people as a tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 618.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you expect this bill forcing us todisclose immediately to pass in this session.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about the expectations regarding a bill.


Passage number 619.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. It will come up, but I just assume itwon't pass simply because they don't have much time. But anything canhappen in the wild last days of a Congressional session, and it's thekind of thing that could be tacked on to something and we would justdeal with it. I just want an understanding here that we are talkingabout [a funds rate range of] 8 to 12 percent despite the fact thatsome people may view this differently and it will get interpretedpublicly as a tightening. I'm not interpreting it as a tightening inand of itself, but just a recognition of the reality that the fundsrate is up around 11 plus percent currently. So, we give ourselves alittle more leeway. Is that where we are. I don't see any dissent onany of this, if I may say so, with these numbers. I'm just gettingthe numerology now. Now I will try to describe reality. And I don'tknow how to put it in words [in the directive]. One possibility,which occurred to me last night but I didn't look at it verycarefully, is to have a directive of the sort that we had in December,which basically says we're not going to ease, we're not going to doanything right now, but we might tighten during the period if theaggregates and the economy are running strong. Does that catch whatpeople are talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about the possibility of the funds rate range and how it might be interpreted. The speaker is seeking consensus and understanding.


Passage number 620.
MR. RICE. Does that commit us to tightening if they runstrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents a question without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 621.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it buys a little leeway; it suggestsa willingness to do a little something if both the aggregates and--.How is it worded here. Specifically what we said--and this is notmagic--is "The Committee seeks in the short run to maintain at leastthe existing degree of reserve restraint. The action is expected tobe associated with growth of [the aggregates].... Depending onevidence about the continuing strength of economic recovery and otherfactors bearing on the business and inflation outlook, somewhatgreater restraint would be acceptable should the aggregates expandmore rapidly." We could change that "depending on" clause. I supposewe'd add something there about financial markets in thesecircumstances. The rest of it is pretty standard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 622.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What you're saying is that you wantit asymmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 623.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's one possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Well, it's one possibility" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It suggests that the speaker is considering a particular option among others without expressing disagreement with the other possibilities.


Passage number 624.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage only mentions the title of Vice Chairman Solomon and does not provide any information or context to suggest any contention or disagreement. It simply states his position without indicating any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 625.
 Because the way it was last time--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the symmetry of something without any contradictory information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 626.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It was symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "It was symmetrical." This is a straightforward observation stating that something has symmetry, without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions.


Passage number 627.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or that was the meaning. Just remember,we had all kinds of nuances there, but it was basically symmetrical.-66-7/16-17/84It wasn't, I guess absolutely symmetrical. Sometimes we use "would"in one sentence and "might" in the other. Maybe we were absolutelysymmetrical last time. This would be asymmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the nuances and symmetry of their previous statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 628.
MR. PARTEE. I couldn't support asymmetrical. No, I thinkthat's the wrong thing to do. And I think it was very widelymisinterpreted in December when it finally came out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker explicitly states their disagreement with the idea of asymmetrical support, indicating contention with the proposal.


Passage number 629.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure it was misinterpreted lasttime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states uncertainty rather than disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 630.
MR. MARTIN. I could not support an asymmetrical directive.I don't know whether implicit in such a directive and not enunciatedbecause of the sensitivity of it would be an understanding that ifthere began to be trouble in financial markets, we would move in theother direction. I take it not. It would not have that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Mr. Martin is expressing his disagreement with an asymmetrical directive and questioning whether there is an understanding that the direction could change if there were financial trouble.


Passage number 631.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, we always have the option of doingwhatever we feel like doing with a consultation. I think it wouldassume that we don't expect to run into that contingency. That's ahard thing to put in the directive anyway, even if we had itsymmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is providing an explanation or clarification, rather than expressing a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 632.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I have a little problem with that kind ofasymmetrical directive. We might tilt it a bit in that direction byplaying around with words like "might." For example, we could say"Somewhat greater reserve restraint would be acceptable and leave"might" [for lesser restraint]. That might tip it a little; somethingof that order I could stomach more than a really overt loading of thedice to push rates up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 633.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In defense of December, we didn't doanything in this directive in December and I wish, in retrospect, thatwe had. We didn't have the evidence for it between the meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a past event and the speaker expresses regret about not taking a certain action. There is no explicit disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 634.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes, but when it was released, it was releasedin a different kind of context and even though we didn't do anything,it was interpreted as a bias towards tightening. And I guess I'drather not have that bias at this point. I'm prepared to see rates goup under the right kinds of circumstances. But I also wouldn't wantto create the image that that's where our biases are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses a preference for not having a bias towards tightening, but is open to the possibility of rates going up under certain circumstances. There is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 635.
MR. BOYKIN. If that were interpreted as a bias, I would viewthat favorably because I think that's where the bias should be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Boykin is expressing his personal view and stating that he sees bias as something positive in a certain scenario.


Passage number 636.
MR. MARTIN. Well, I'm not sure that's where the bias shouldbe. I think it may be a view of our setting policy such that we'reaccused of bias in the sense that [people say]: "These guys alwayssee inflation coming, no matter what the price figures are." I thinkwe have to avoid that appearance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and concerns regarding policy and avoiding the appearance of bias.


Passage number 637.
MR. BOEHNE. That's my point, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Boehne simply states "That's my point, right," which indicates agreement or confirmation rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 638.
MR. MARTIN. "Knee-jerk inflation fighters" is the quote.That's a very unfair remark, but we do receive it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Although the remark is described as unfair, there is no explicit disagreement expressed by the speaker.


Passage number 639.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A pretty good reputation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This phrase does not contain any indication or suggestion of disagreement or contention. It simply describes a reputation as "pretty good."


Passage number 640.
7/16-17/84MR. BOYKIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The given text "7/16-17/84MR. BOYKIN" is simply a date and a name, and there is no clear indication of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 641.
 Well, my response to that is--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's what central bankers aresupposed to have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or contradictory ideas. It simply states a personal response to a statement.


Passage number 642.
MR. MARTIN. Yes, but always.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply a reply affirming the presence of something.


Passage number 643.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't think we can see the futureclearly enough to bias this. I think we could get both some very goodnews on inflation and a marked slowing in the economy. I don't thinkwe ought to seem to want to raise rates at every opportunity and notchthem upward over time. And that's what that suggests to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 644.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, governor, it seems to me the conversationhas been that ex all of these other overriding considerations at themoment--LCDs, fragility, and so forth--the sentiment is that, allother things being equal, we would be [tightening].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their understanding of the conversation and acknowledges that, although there may be other considerations, the general sentiment is that they would be tightening.


Passage number 645.
MR. PARTEE. I wouldn't--not with an M1 projection of 5-1/2percent. I would not be tightening unless M1 comes in above 5-1/2percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. MR. PARTEE simply states that he would not tighten unless M1 comes in above 5-1/2 percent. This is a personal opinion or perspective, rather than a direct disagreement or argument.


Passage number 646.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's all it says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provided does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 647.
MR. PARTEE. And if it comes in below, I think the funds rateought to flex down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "And if it comes in below, I think the funds rate ought to flex down" implies that there is a difference of opinion on whether the funds rate should decrease if it falls below a certain level. This suggests the possibility of disagreement or contention among individuals.


Passage number 648.
MR. BLACK. That's what shifted my position right there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the statement "That's what shifted my position right there." The speaker, Mr. Black, simply expresses that something caused a change in his position. Without further context, it is difficult to determine if there is any contention or disagreement involved.


Passage number 649.
MR. GRAMLEY. I could certainly support an asymmetricaldirective because I do think we have to worry lots more about theeconomy growing too fast than the economy slowing down too much. Butprecisely for that reason, I think a modest move in that directionalong the lines suggested by Ed would be all right, in the sense thatI think the chances that M1 growth is going to slow below 5-1/2percent are about 1 in 10. I'm really not worried about that. Ithink the third quarter is going to be quite a strong quarter; unlesssomething very unusual happens, we're likely to get more M1 growth inthat [quarter]. I don't disagree with Chuck; if [M1 did slow to below5-1/2 percent], I'd want to think about easing. But I don't thinkit's going to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley agrees with the idea of an asymmetrical directive and supports a modest move in that direction. He also agrees with Chuck that if M1 growth slows below 5-1/2 percent, easing should be considered.


Passage number 650.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't really think so either, but Ithink it could.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is expressing agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 651.
MR. GRAMLEY. If what we did was take that operationalparagraph and used the word "would" in line 81 [of the staff's draft]and left "might" in line 82, careful Fed watchers would say "Aha. adegree of asymmetry." So, we'd get our purposes served.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 652.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, you know the Oracle of Delphiused to have this kind of language in it--pretty subtle readings ofpigeons' entrails. Having said that, I think it's probably okay to dothat kind of thing. The very frankly asymmetrical approach isprobably not the most advisable. So, I also would vote for ajudicious mix of "mights" and "woulds" or "woulds" and "coulds" orwhatever else we can use.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions about using subtle language in a particular context, without offering any contradictory viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 653.
-68-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I do care, but I don't care thatmuch. I'm perfectly happy to be asymmetrical. I just want the recordto show that because the situation is asymmetrical without much doubtin my mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their stance on the situation being asymmetrical.


Passage number 654.
MR. WALLICH. I think the symmetrical solution, in theunlikely event that the aggregates or the economy slowed down, wouldnot be bad. But the possibility of a fortuitous move down without anyreal change in the situation could be very adverse and would then bereversed. Subsequently, rates would go up again and we would havegiven the wrong signal. I don't think we ought to take that chance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and concerns.


Passage number 655.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's the same point I made, Henry,and I'm assuming that this language could be interpreted to guardagainst that just because of changing bank attitudes toward excessreserves. This would prevent a meaningful drop in the rates. Wecould use this kind of [wording] and the flexibility would besufficient to cover that contingency as well. Would you agree withthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows agreement between the speaker and Henry. They both express their views on the effectiveness of a certain language in preventing a drop in rates. The phrase "Would you agree with that" also indicates a desire for agreement.


Passage number 656.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would agree with that, certainly. It'spreferable that we have enough leeway here so that we don't give afalse sense of easing if the money supply is not declining and thereisn't evidence of the economy slowing, and so forth. And that maytake a certain amount of flexibility in the management of reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses agreement with the idea of having flexibility in the management of reserves in order to avoid giving a false sense of easing.


Passage number 657.
MR. BOEHNE. I would think that the sentence beginning online 83--"In either case such a change would be considered against"all these things--certainly gives us enough flexibility to usejudgment to guard against these fortuitous events that might lead onedown the wrong path. It has everything in there except the kitchensink, really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing an opinion about the flexibility and effectiveness of a certain sentence.


Passage number 658.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's mainly because I thought we'dbe clear about it. I take it the contingency that has been raisedhere, which strikes me as a real one, tends to say the aggregates aremore or less on path. We're always guessing what they will be nextmonth. Let's say we start out with [M1 growth in] July at 3 percentor 4 percent, but we have a strong suspicion that it's going to behigher later and the other aggregates might be a little on the lowside in July. But we have a strong suspicion that they're going to behigher later as the business news remains fairly good and there is nobig change in that. If the money markets began easing, we'd be verycautious about supplying reserves until there was further confirmationof low money supply numbers and all the rest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their thoughts and suspicions about the aggregates and money supply numbers. They mention that they would be cautious about supplying reserves but do not explicitly state any disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 659.
MR. CORRIGAN. I think you have to have a margin ofprotection in that direction. It would be almost calamitous to end upwith a situation in which interest rates went down in the thirdquarter and had to go up in the fourth quarter. That, to me, would bethe worst of all worlds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a personal opinion expressed by Mr. Corrigan about the potential negative consequences of a situation where interest rates decrease in the third quarter and then increase in the fourth quarter.


Passage number 660.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would mean something as long-lastingeven as quarters. To get a great feeling of relief and then in thenext month to see them go back drastically in the other direction withthe money supply taking off would be unfortunate, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a hypothetical situation and expressing a personal opinion about it.


Passage number 661.
MR. BOEHNE. So do I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne simply agrees with the statement made by someone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 662.
-69-7/16-17/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It also complicates the LDC politicalattitude. If they get a sense of relief and then they get whammedagain, it just makes things harder.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The passage suggests that the situation complicates the political attitude of LDCs (Less Developed Countries) by alternating between giving them a sense of relief and then creating difficulties for them again. This implies contention or disagreement within the LDCs' political environment.


Passage number 663.
MR. GUFFEY. I don't think I understand the rationale for thebias on the up side on rates. We're talking about a 4-week perioduntil the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Guffey expressing his confusion and seeking clarification on the rationale for the bias on the up side on rates.


Passage number 664.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Five weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 665.
MR. GUFFEY. We're at the 17th now and we're talking about anFOMC meeting on the 21st of August. However many days that is, itisn't very many. And the amount of information that will come in tosuggest that we would push rates up from the present level further--.That's unconscionable in my view because we have had rates in the last30 days go from the 10-1/2 to 10-3/4 percent range to 11-1/4 percent.And to put a directive out that will be read 30 days from now thatsuggests that this Committee sat around and adopted an asymmetricaldirective that suggests a bias toward further tightening when wetalked about the LDC problems and we talked about the fragility in thefinancial markets makes no sense to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's view on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 666.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I would not interpret this, Roger, assomething we're bringing on just between now and August. Of course,this is the first meeting of a quarter. We're looking at quarterlygrowth rates for the third quarter for the first time. And we'retrying to structure a directive that hopefully will last us throughthe quarter--not just until the next time--and give some indicationabout our basic concerns about how fast the economy is growing, therisks in financial markets, and so on. I would prefer to interpret itmore broadly than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an explanation given by Mr. Gramley about the interpretation of a directive.


Passage number 667.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would add that there's no doubt in mymind--although I may be wrong--that the risks are that the economy isgrowing too fast. And on the inflationary side, the only thing thatconcerns me is the financial side. I'd be just as tight as I could bewithout precipitating that situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It consists of a personal opinion and concern about the potential risks facing the economy.


Passage number 668.
MR. GUFFEY. We may be there now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey is simply stating a possibility or suggesting that they may already be at the intended destination.


Passage number 669.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe. We're not too far from it. ButI'm always willing to probe a little further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although the speaker expresses a level of uncertainty by using "maybe," there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their willingness to investigate or explore a topic more deeply.


Passage number 670.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Aren't you going to be asked aboutcurrent short-term policy when you testify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question being asked seems straightforward and does not reflect any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 671.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Probably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it starts with the word "Probably," indicating uncertainty about the statement that follows.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 672.
MR. PARTEE. Quite strongly, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The use of the phrase "quite strongly" indicates a strong disagreement or assertion of a certain opinion.


Passage number 673.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think with any of these directivesI would say, if I have to say something, that it has not changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses a personal opinion about the topic without any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 674.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would you convey the flavor ofasymmetry in your answers to those questions.asked.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply asking for an explanation of how to convey the flavor of asymmetry in answering certain questions. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 675.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions the title "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or specific information.


Passage number 676.
 It depends upon how the questions are-70-7/16-17/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Suppose the questions were asked theright way, would you do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is asking for a conditional response based on how the questions are asked.


Passage number 677.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 678.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Rather than symmetry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Rather than symmetry" does not present any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It is simply introducing an alternative perspective or idea.


Passage number 679.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe. I'm not going to say it justthat way, I don't think. I might say that as I look at the situationwith the economy moving the way it is and the inflationary risks, yes,there's a possibility we might have to tighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty and presenting a different perspective on the situation.


Passage number 680.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Particularly since you guys aren'tdoing anything on the deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion that the group being referred to is not actively addressing the deficit.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 681.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Particularly since you guys aren't doinganything on the deficit--and as I evaluate the economy--I don't seegreat prospects for much easing. I might well say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing disagreement or contention with the other party (referred to as "you guys") about their lack of action on the deficit and their evaluation of the economy.


Passage number 682.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would hope you would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statement or indication of disagreement or contention. It is a fragment of a sentence and lacks any context to determine if there is any disagreement present.


Passage number 683.
MR. BLACK. I hope you would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is simple and does not involve any conflicting opinions or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 684.
MR. PARTEE. No great easing this time for the period. Itseems pretty unlikely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there is no anticipated easing for the period, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 685.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, where we are and if that's the wayyou like it, is "seeks to maintain." We'll make it "would" instead of"might" and leave the [other] "might." We'll stick in 5-1/2 percent,7-1/2 percent, and 9 percent. I think there's some understanding thatsome flexibility is necessary to prevent false [signals] and 8 to 12percent. If we don't have any general consensus [to try] to improveon that, let's close it now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents various options and suggestions for maintaining a certain situation.


Passage number 686.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context. The information provided is insufficient to make a judgement.


Passage number 687.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin NoGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now that we've disposed of that, we haveto return to our other little problem here, if I can remember where wewere. We have an issue yet. What we tentatively thought about waskeeping them all the same; I began to worry a bit that if we keep M3and debt the same, we actually ought to put a word in the directiveitself. I don't know just what it would say. I don't remember whatthis boiler plate, which is pretty awful, says. We ought to add asentence that while we reiterate the 6 to 9 percent and 8 to 11percent, the Committee thinks there is a certain probability thatgrowth will be above them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 688.
7/16-17/84MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage "7/16-17/84MR. MARTIN" appears to be a date or a reference and does not contain any statements or arguments that would indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 689.
 Because of certain--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what Steve was suggesting when Iraised this question with him was to add a sentence immediatelyfollowing the one on the ranges saying "It was anticipated that debtand M3 would increase at rates somewhat above their upper limits,reflecting in considerable part a rise in debt and the decline inequity financing related to recent merger activities." Maybe weshould put a "however" in there. I scribbled down something, which Iwasn't very happy with. In effect, it says that while this wasanticipated the Committee felt that these [recent] rates wereexcessive in the longer-term perspective--excessive as a benchmark forevaluating the appropriate trend for credit and M3 growth. Let me trythat out. That may not be so bad. Put a "while" in front of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting adding a sentence to the original statement, but they express dissatisfaction with their own suggestion and suggest an alternative wording. This indicates that there is disagreement or uncertainty about the best way to convey the information.


Passage number 690.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That comes after the sentence youjust read about mergers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It only states that the topic of mergers will be discussed, without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 691.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. Make it all one sentence. We statethe ranges. They're unchanged. Then say "While it was anticipatedthat debt and M3 might increase at rates somewhat above their upperlevels, reflecting in large part a rise in debt and decline in equityfinancing related to recent merger activity, the Committee felt thathigher target ranges would provide an inappropriate benchmark forlonger-term trends in M3 and debt growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides information about the ranges of debt and M3, as well as the committee's decision on higher target ranges for longer-term trends. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 692.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But then we're putting ourselves onrecord that we're projecting--if I understand it right--a continuedhectic pace of merger activity in 1985. Or are you saying that 1985is going to be higher because of the mergers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question or clarification about the projection of merger activity in 1985.


Passage number 693.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is a 1984 sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This sentence is a straightforward statement and doesn't contain any elements of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a neutral statement providing a historical context.


Passage number 694.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh. I'm sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses an apology.


Passage number 695.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would not like to put that "in considerablepart" as the main reason why the credit variable is growing above theupper end. It's because the economy is growing so fast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is providing additional information and explanation regarding the growth of the credit variable, without expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 696.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can take out the "in considerablepart." Or we could take out the whole thing about merger activitiesand say "will rise somewhat above their upper limits, the Committeefelt that such a rate of growth was an inappropriate benchmark forevaluating credit growth over time." Something like that tells themwhy we didn't raise the rate, even though we expect it to be higher.This is just for '84.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply suggesting different options for revising the text without expressing any disagreement with the content.


Passage number 697.
MR. MARTIN. I think that's reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their agreement with a statement.


Passage number 698.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, without worrying about theparticular language, but that it is something about this being toohigh a benchmark for evaluating what is right, is that okay.SEVERAL. Right. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 699.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we're set. Wait a minute. Do we needto change anything else. Maybe we ought to go over it. I'm lookingat the typed-in language. "In furtherance of these objectives, the-72-7/16-17/84Committee agreed to reaffirm the ranges for monetary growth that wereestablished in January" etc. We take out this stuff about M1. Thenwe give the total debt range, which is reaffirmed. Then we put it ina sentence. And that's the end of 1984. We're accepting all thelanguage the staff has here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the process of reviewing and making changes to a document.


Passage number 700.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But what about the sentence at theend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the passage, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 701.
 "The Committee understood that policy implementation wouldrequire continuing appraisals of relationships--"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not there. I'm just talking about theranges. I assume that will stay in, but I'm not talking about '85yet, which is the next sentence. I'm talking about all the sentenceson page 3, or whatever I have in front of me, which I guess is thesame thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the speaker's understanding of the committee's views on policy implementation.


Passage number 702.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But doesn't the sentence I started toread, even though I jumped the gun, apply both to '84 and '85.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply asking whether the sentence applies to both years ('84 and '85) even though the person began reading prematurely.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 703.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I assume that will stay in, but webetter [check]. Is that the general assumption--that that sentencestays in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and suggesting that the sentence in question be checked or verified. This implies that there may be disagreement or contention surrounding whether or not the sentence should remain.


Passage number 704.
MR. PARTEE. What sentence are you talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot determine without context.


Passage number 705.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The next sentence in the next paragraph.The one-sentence paragraph: "The Committee understood that policyimplementation would require...." I'm just assuming that stays in.Apply it both to '84 and '85. All I'm talking about now is '84 andI'm just accepting the language that was prepared here, with theaddition of the sentence we talked about. The effect of this languagechange from what we had before is to remove the probationary status ofMl, but the other paragraph says that they are all to a degreeprobationary. With that, let us vote on 1984.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement.


Passage number 706.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This question cannot be accurately answered without the passage being provided.


Passage number 707.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me review the bidding on '85. We hada couple of questions. Is the consensus for debt unchanged at 8 to 11percent. Some people did suggest 8 to 10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The individuals mentioned are simply stating their agreement or consensus on a particular issue.


Passage number 708.
MR. CORRIGAN. I still like that, but I think 8 to 11 percentis all right. I assume you will be saying something about thishorrendous pace of credit and debt growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan expresses his opinion about the ideal range for credit and debt growth, but there is no opposition or argument from anyone else in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 709.
-73-7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The general consensus is toward 8 to 11percent, I take it. I think everybody was pretty much for 6 to 9percent for M3. Is that correct. We have this little cosmetic pointon M2. Let me just see: Among the Committee members, how many want itat 6 to 8-1/2 percent. Eight. [Secretary's note: Messrs. Boehne,Corrigan, Gramley, Martin, Partee, Rice, Ms. Seger, and Mr. Wallich.]There seems to be a clear majority for that. Can we live with 6 to8-1/2 percent. That brings us down to the M1 number, where I take itthe range is between 4 to 7-1/2 percent and 4 to 7 percent. We had atentative vote on this before, but we were split. Let me try again.For 4 to 7 percent. Six. [Secretary's note: Mr. Corrigan, Mr.Gramley, Ms. Horn, Mr. Partee, Ms. Seger, and Mr. Wallich.] Does thatmean the other five, excluding me, have a firm opinion or are someneutral.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The passage mentions different percentages for M3, M2, and M1, and there is disagreement among the committee members about what the ranges should be. Some members are in favor of specific percentages, while others are split or neutral.


Passage number 710.
MR. PARTEE. Tie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states the speaker's statement without any opposing or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 711.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who wants 4 to 7-1/2 percent. Five. Thatmeans everybody has an opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that everyone has an opinion without specifying the subject of the opinion or any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 712.
MR. PARTEE. Now how about a "try to live with".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements. It simply presents a question or suggestion ("how about a try to live with") without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 713.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, we can try to live with 4 to 7-1/2percent, but with some explicit statement that a further reduction to7 percent might well be forthcoming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is expressing a willingness to live with a certain percentage (4 to 7-1/2 percent), but also suggesting that further reduction to 7 percent may happen in the future. There is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement presented.


Passage number 714.
MR. MARTIN. I don't have any trouble with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement by Mr. Martin does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 715.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions the title "VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON" without providing any information or context about this individual. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 716.
 Then I think the tactical advantagegets lost because in a certain sense--MR. PARTEE. He's not talking about publicly saying it. Areyou.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and there is no contradiction or disagreement between the two statements.


Passage number 717.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I feel there is more to this thanthat. These are awfully weak reductions in these things if we don'tgo for 4 to 7 percent. I somewhat prefer going to 4 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and preference for achieving reductions of 4 to 7 percent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 718.
MR. PARTEE. Who can live with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the phrase "Who can live with it" suggests that there is a disagreement or discontent regarding a certain situation or proposition.


Passage number 719.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --ranges of 8 to 11, 6 to 9, 6 to 8-1/2,and 4 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents different ranges of percentages without indicating any disagreement or contradiction between them.


Passage number 720.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 721.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesMR. PARTEE. Everybody could live with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. All the individuals mentioned (Chairman Volcker, Vice Chairman Solomon, President Boehne, etc.) are in agreement with the statement.


Passage number 722.
7/16-17/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we still have to do some talkingabout the uncertainty of velocity. This is based upon an assumptionthat it returns to more normal behavior. If it doesn't, which couldbe in the upper direction, we obviously have to reexamine it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It discusses the need for further discussion and examination if the velocity does not return to normal behavior.


Passage number 723.
MR. CORRIGAN. But that last sentence you were talking aboutbefore provides for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Corrigan simply states that the last sentence being referred to provides for something, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 724.
MR. GRAMLEY. He means in the testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is simply referred to for clarification or to provide additional information.


Passage number 725.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking about the testimony. Allright, I guess we're finished. I don't know where we are on theseprojections. I think you ought to look at them again anyway. I don'tfeel that strongly about it, but I don't think we have to sit here andsay we're assuming that the exchange rate is exactly where it is now.But I think an assumption that it does not decline [unintelligible]something like getting up toward 10 percent. We seem to have 5percent up and down wiggles regularly, and I'm not sure that that'sanything very much. But make an assumption that permits the Humphrey-Hawkins report to say that these projections are not based upon asevere, if that's the right word, depreciation of the dollar whichwould obviously have substantial, important and significantimplications for changes in prices. The dollar remains substantiallywithin the range of the last year. That probably allows for quite adecline, doesn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No - There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and suggesting that they should review the projections again. They also express their opinion on the volatility of the exchange rate and make a suggestion for assumptions in the Humphrey-Hawkins report.


Passage number 726.
MR. WALLICH. Wouldn't that have a substantial market effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a statement or asking a question.


Passage number 727.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm trying partly to avoid themarket effect. We're saying we assume that the dollar is essentiallyin the range of the past year, but if it did decline a lot more thanthat, we would have more price inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states a hypothetical scenario without conflicting opinions or contrasting ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 728.
MR. WALLICH. We wouldn't intervene. That might be theconclusion of some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The statement "We wouldn't intervene" indicates a potential disagreement or contention with the idea of intervening.


Passage number 729.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I hope we're going to intervene inthe deutschemark if the dollar goes above 3 deutschemark. Thatbecomes a threshold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement expresses a personal hope or opinion about the need for intervention in the deutschemark if the dollar surpasses a certain value.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 730.
MR. WALLICH. But I was thinking of supporting the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich mentions that he was thinking of supporting the dollar, which suggests he has a different perspective or opinion compared to others involved in the conversation. However, without further context, it is not clear who he is disagreeing with or what the disagreement is about.


Passage number 731.
MR. MARTIN. You wouldn't have to take a calculator to Europethen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Martin is a simple assertion without any opposing views or conflicting opinions presented.


