Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So it’s always “so moved”.  There’s no variation. CHAIR YELLEN. No, that’s it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer simply asks a question, to which Chair Yellen responds by confirming his statement, indicating agreement.


Passage number 2.
 MR. FISCHER.  No variation.  All right. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  And then I say, “Without objection.”  [Laughter] Maybe there is an objection, but at any rate, our first item is a staff report on market developments and operations.  Lorie Logan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply describes the sequence of events and does not involve any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 3.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Simon, just on this last discussion, can you project forward to an imagined steady state in which we are using overnight reverse repos as a key part of our scheme.  What volume level and counterparty population do you think would be required just to exercise monetary control.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 4.
 MR. POTTER. We have reasonable control in terms of providing a floor with the 140 counterparties we have right now.  The government money funds account for just over 50 percent of the assets under management in that sector; the prime for about 85 percent of the assets under management.  So I don’t think that we would necessarily need to add counterparties solely for the reason of execution.  The reason is that we think it’s hard to explain why a certain  set of money funds have access and others don’t have access, given how we rolled out the waves—so that’s a fairness objective. In terms of how large the facility will get, that’s really going to depend on the spread that you set.  And if we’re at the current spread, we’ve seen activity, when Treasury bill supply declined, between $200 billion and $300 billion.  So if you added more counterparties, it’s likely you’d get slightly more usage.  Over the last week, usage has declined quite markedly.  You can’t quite see it in the chart because we closed the chart on Friday, but yesterday we dropped down to $53 billion of usage as rates got higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 5.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange of thanks between Mr. Lockhart and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 6.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  You said in response to President Lockhart, and in your presentation, that the overnight RRP facility is providing an effective floor on the RP rate. Late last year, when the Desk was seeking an extension of the program—this program of testing and exploration and learning and research—I was asking what were we going to learn in the period ahead.  And I was told we’d learn more about whether it would provide an effective floor.  So it seems like we’ve learned that.  I’m wondering, are we going to learn more about the extent to which this provides an effective floor between now and the time at liftoff when we would want to use this. And, if so, is there a reason to continue this program at this scale.  Or should we be winding it down and waiting and rolling it up for when the time comes to use it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question from Mr. Lacker seeking clarification on whether further learning is needed regarding the effectiveness of the overnight RRP facility as a floor on the RP rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 7.
 MR. POTTER.  I would say, under the current set of rates, the additional amount that we can learn relative to what we learned over the past few months is going to be much smaller than what we learned in the first nine months. We will still learn just a little bit—we’ve got the quarter-end coming up.  If we weren’t restricted to the 0 to 5 basis points, we could definitely learn more.  Right now—you can see in chart 14 that repo rates have increased quite a lot.  And we don’t know what would happen if we weren’t restricted to the 0 to 5 basis points. I don’t think that we feel comfortable recommending a change just to test for what we might learn there, because trying to explain changes like that to markets could be quite difficult, just as explaining the change that “We have tested it, it works great, and we are just going to shut it down until, say, the middle of next year” would be a reasonably complicated thing to explain, given we have the authorization through January 2015.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter expresses his belief that they could learn more if they were not restricted to the 0 to 5 basis points, while also acknowledging the difficulty of explaining any changes to the markets. This implies a disagreement or conflicting opinions on whether or not to make a change.


Passage number 8.
 MR. LACKER.  If I can follow up, Madam Chair.  Do markets view this as a permanent program at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a dialogue between two individuals and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 9.
 MR. POTTER.  No.  No, they don’t.  Certainly, many people in the market on both sides hope that it will be a permanent program.  When we meet with the types of investors who use this program, they would like to have more clarity as to whether it will be a permanent program or not.  Most analysts who look at the issues that we face expect it to become a permanent program.  But the investors have to be wary as to the decisions that you might take around this table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not have any elements of contention or disagreement. It simply presents the opinions and hopes of different people involved in the market.


Passage number 10.
 MR. LACKER.  One of the memos contained information that someone is designing a fund specifically for investments in this.  That seems to indicate that at least some asset managers view this as highly likely to become relatively permanent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply relaying information about the presence of a memo that suggests certain asset managers see the mentioned investment as likely to be relatively permanent.


Passage number 11.
 MR. POTTER.  Certainly, I think both because of the success that we’ve had in forming a floor, and when they look at the problem we are facing with a very large balance sheet, they would expect us to use this type of operation—it would be a natural conclusion.  And the overnight RRP−only fund will be one device that will be likely to firm the floor.  There could be issues arising from that type of model that might come out in the later discussion that we have.  CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 12.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had a question about chart 17 on exhibit 3, which is the answer to the question about expected number of months.  I had a concern that this line of questioning could send the signal that the Committee is thinking about the decision to lift off in terms of a time-contingent basis as opposed to a state-contingent basis. I was wondering if the Desk had contemplated formulating this kind of question, either replacing or augmenting the survey by asking about changes in conditions that would lead to liftoff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, expresses concern about the line of questioning and suggests that it may suggest a time-contingent basis for the decision to lift off, instead of a state-contingent basis.


Passage number 13.
 MR. POTTER.  So we asked for economic conditions at liftoff.  We also asked—I’m just going to check that I’ve got this right—for the modal time of liftoff and the time at which you expect reinvestments to end.  Then, we took the difference between those two dates. I think it would be a little bit leading right now for us to ask for economic conditions consistent with ending reinvestments, because we haven’t really directly communicated that as being one of the criteria.  If that is one of the criteria that you choose for ending reinvestments, then we could definitely ask that question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining a process and discussing a potential question that could be asked.


Passage number 14.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I see.  So this is imputed from two different questions.  I didn’t understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification.


Passage number 15.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Potter responds with a simple word "Yes" without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 16.
 MS. LOGAN.  The question asks:  “Provide your estimate of the most likely quarter and year during which the FOMC will first cease reinvesting some or all payments of principal on Treasuries and/or agency debt and MBS.  In addition, please provide your expectation for the timing.” It has been a long-standing question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the question and providing background information.


Passage number 17.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That is helpful.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple exchange of gratitude between two individuals.


Passage number 18.
   MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Actually, President Lacker’s question touched on mine.  Let me just be clear.  So, Simon, based upon your conversations with market participants and as you think about the different counterparty expansion options, the market participants don’t have a strong view as to whether or not this will, in fact, be a temporary program through our transition to policy normalization or whether or not it will become a permanent program, say, still in existence 5 to 10 years from now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on whether market participants have a strong opinion on whether the program will be temporary or permanent.


Passage number 19.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  There’s no real confidence of the operating regime, say, in 2020 that the Federal Reserve would have.  That’s probably similar to any projection six to seven years ahead that people would make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the lack of confidence in the operating regime of the Federal Reserve in 2020.


Passage number 20.
 MR. EVANS. Would any of these options under consideration tend to bolster the belief that it would be more permanent than otherwise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any options or beliefs that would lead to contention or disagreement. It simply poses a hypothetical question.


Passage number 21.
 MR. POTTER.  I think that option 2 is definitely going to make people think that it is more likely permanent.  Option 3,in which we reach out to a different set of firms, would certainly do that.  Option 1—definitely the pro on that is that it leaves flexibility with the current counterparty list. The reasons that we don’t really like option 1 are, first, that we think it’s likely that you will choose something like the overnight RRP.  And second, it takes time to onboard the new counterparties that we would get, and it’s a strange operating model to have this fixed list whereby the only changes to the counterparties on the list come about because a firm goes out of business or its assets under management go below $5 billion, which are some of the changes that we’ve had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. It simply presents different options and their pros and cons without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 22.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement of thanks and acknowledgment.


Passage number 23.
MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I defer my comments on panels 21, 22, and 23 until we get into the discussion.  I want to come back to the Term Deposit Facility, because you have mentioned we have had some memos about perhaps providing some flexibility there by allowing for withdrawal, but at a penalty rate.  And I just wondered, as you mentioned, Simon, if you could give us a sense of the mathematics at this juncture as we contemplate this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 24.
 MR. POTTER. I’m going to pass that over to Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are going to pass the topic or question over to Bill.


Passage number 25.
  MR. FISHER.  Bill, would you provide us with the mathematics, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply asking Bill to provide some mathematics.


Passage number 26.
 MR. ENGLISH.  In terms of the breakability.  Part of what we described in the memo was, for example, a fee that would involve giving up the interest on the term deposit and paying a penalty of 75 basis points at an annual rate on the amount.  So that would mean that if you broke the term deposit immediately—when you got it, in effect—you’d be giving up the interest and then paying the 75 basis points.  That would be something like using the term deposit at the discount window and getting a discount window loan at 75 basis points.  Later in the week, if you broke it, it would be more expensive because you would be giving up the interest and you’d also be paying 75 basis points for the whole week, in effect, rather than paying it just for the couple of days, say, that you needed the cash. So we have in mind a pretty hefty penalty.  It’s higher than the cost of using the term deposit as collateral at the discount window, which you could do and borrow at the discount window.  So we think there wouldn’t be usage except in very, very unusual circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation of the proposed fee for breaking a term deposit and the potential consequences of doing so.


Passage number 27.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  I know we’re not going to talk about financial stability, Madam Chair, but following up on Lorie’s point, we’re talking about the VIX and we’re also talking about what’s happening in high yield.  The Santander issue caught my eye in terms of their auto deal.  I mean, nonprime debt issuance has been growing very rapidly.  It is about 34percent of the market thus far this year; it’s up from one-fourth last year.  And then the CLO market has priced $53 billion or $54 billion through last week; that’s up 35 percent over last year. I’m just wondering, from the Desk’s standpoint, are you seeing these as danger signals, or has it been expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 28.
 MS. LOGAN. What I was reporting was what we’re hearing market participants focus on lately, and they’ve been talking a lot about the low levels of volatility and the spread levels, particularly in high yield, as we show in the chart.  I haven’t been in conversations with them when they’ve been pointing to particular vulnerabilities in particular asset classes, though I know there’s a lot of staff work going into this and other areas.  It wasn’t part of the conversations I’ve heard.  They’ve been more focused on these overall levels in these particular markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 29.
 MR. FISHER.  Perhaps, Madam Chair, when we rotate back at whatever proximate meeting we have, we might drill down a little bit on the CLO market because it obviously is something that got out of control before.  It is growing like Topsy, and I just hope we’re paying attention to it again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a suggestion to focus on the CLO market in the future and hopes that attention will be paid to it.


Passage number 30.
  There’s a limit to what we can do, but I’m just— MR. POTTER. It’s certainly a market that we have tracked, and the structures that are in place are reasonably robust.  I think that I would be more concerned about the reach-for-yield that’s going on perhaps outside the United States and about an event similar to what we saw last year happening—but not within the United States, because we have really good insight now into some of the behavior here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. Instead, it shows agreement and reinforcement of ideas. Mr. Potter agrees with the statement about the limitations of what can be done and further supports it by stating his concern about potential risks happening outside the United States.


Passage number 31.
 MR. FISHER. Forgive me for taking up time on this, but you’re less concerned about the CLO expansion domestically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 32.
 MR. POTTER.  Less concerned. It’s not like 2005 to 2007, when I think we ignored some of the large growth in credit.  However, insight into what’s happening in the rest of the   world is quite low.  In Lori’s chart number 8, if you look at the correlation there between two things that don’t necessarily have to be related—they have been quite close since late February.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting the speaker's viewpoint without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 33.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. The speaker is expressing gratitude, which does not imply disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 34.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  President Fisher, if I can add one thing.  So we have heard anecdotes of investor funding essentially triple-A tranches or other tranches of CLO, using financial leverage, repo, or prime brokerage.  We added a special question in the SCOOS this round asking exactly this question, whether dealers have seen funding of these structures. The responses came back saying that, first of all, they have seen an easing in terms of funding since the beginning of the year.  And they have seen demand coming from credit hedge funds, and then they have seen funding across the capital structure essentially from triple-A all the way down to the mezzanine tranche.  Now, this is not quantitative—it’s a qualitative question—but it confirms the anecdotes that we have heard in markets, that investors are reaching out to boost yields using financial leverage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 35.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of gratitude between Mr. Fisher and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 36.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I have two questions for Simon regarding eligibility.  The first one is whether any nonbank SIFIs—AIG, Prudential, or GE Capital—have asked whether they should have access to the ON RRP facility because they are supervised by the Fed, and money market funds aren’t.  And then the second question is that currently it looks like the SEC reform is going to go forward sometime in July.  But if it were for some reason to stall and we were to choose to only use government money market funds and not prime money market funds, do you think there would be sufficient capacity to run this facility with the government funds only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking two questions for clarification.


Passage number 37.
 MR. POTTER. To answer the first question, we’ve definitely heard from at least one of those three. I think that is a different type of extended counterparty.  We could definitely do that.  I just think it’s easier to have a very clear regime in place.  We could use the FSOC—if they designate a firm a systemically important nonbank institution, that could be one metric for doing that. On the government funds—if you go to the chart which shows you that most of the take-up has been from the government money funds, and given that we have somewhere between 50 and 60 percent of the assets under management in the government money fund industry, I think if we wanted to exclude the prime funds, we could certainly do that.  One of the things that is true is prime funds can invest in government-only funds.  So just excluding the prime funds doesn’t necessarily mean they won’t have pretty quick access through the family of funds they’re in to the overnight RRP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different options and possibilities for a clear regime regarding extended counterparties and government funds, but there is no disagreement or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 38.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Though there may be a difference between treating somebody as a counterparty and giving them access to instruments indirectly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a statement about the potential difference between treating someone as a counterparty and giving them indirect access to instruments.


Passage number 39.
 MR. POTTER.  Definitely, there is a difference, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 40.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This is because the passage consists of a statement expressing appreciation or gratitude ("Thank you") rather than a statement that presents differing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 41.
 MR. FISHER.  May I follow up, Madam Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The presence of the phrase "May I follow up" suggests that there is disagreement or contention in the passage. Mr. Fisher is likely requesting permission to express his differing viewpoint or to challenge a previous statement.


Passage number 42.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think what we emphasized in the memos that we sent was there are two issues here.  One issue is the financial-stability issue, the kind of run-risk issue.  There, excluding the prime funds doesn’t really help for the reasons that Simon just gave.  They can still run.  They just run through an affiliated government fund, a government-only fund.  The other issue is the desire to send a signal, make a statement, about concerns about the business model of prime money funds.  And that would be a separate reason not directly involving the issues surrounding normalization, but another policy point that you want to make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Instead, it presents two separate issues and discusses the reasons for excluding prime funds. The speaker is providing an explanation rather than engaging in a disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 43.
 MR. NATALUCCI. There’s another financial-stability issue which the memo highlights that you might want to consider and that is that the variability or volatility of take-up of the prime funds is much higher than that of the government funds.  If you have this individual cap and the volatility of take-up is very high, you might see a tradeoff between volatility and where you set the cap, essentially.  So excluding the prime funds would essentially have a take-up that is much less volatile than if you included them.  Now of course, if the prime funds start putting money into the government funds, that might increase the volatility of the government funds, so the tradeoff is not obvious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents two opposing viewpoints - excluding prime funds would result in lower volatility, but if prime funds start putting money into government funds, it may increase the volatility of government funds. The tradeoff between volatility and setting the cap is not obvious.


Passage number 44.
 MR. POTTER.  Also, we have to be careful because we don’t know exactly how the prime funds use their access.  So it could be part of the bargaining path or make the market more competitive.  Sorry, President Lacker, a follow-up. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the need for caution and pointing out that there is uncertainty regarding how prime funds use their access. They do mention that it could have various effects, but there is no argument or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 45.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I just want to follow up on Eric’s point to understand the New York Desk’s thought here. So if we were to decide to exclude prime funds, you’re not worried about closing the barn door.  You have 25 percent share of allotment presently.  That would not present a problem to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher is seeking clarification and expressing his understanding of the New York Desk's position.


Passage number 46.
 MR. POTTER. As I said in the briefing, we would attempt to restore the efficacy of the overnight RRP.  It’s really a decision for you about that tradeoff.  At first, the efficacy would be lower without the prime funds, but over time I’m sure we can build that back up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging that the efficacy of the overnight RRP would initially be lower without the prime funds but expresses confidence in being able to improve it over time.


Passage number 47.
 MR. FISHER. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher simply thanks someone (presumably Chair Yellen), and Chair Yellen responds.


Passage number 48.
  MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m going to refer to exhibit 1, chart 3, which shows factors contributing to the decline in five-year, five-year forward Treasury rates. There are a lot of factors here.  A lot of the market chatter that I’ve heard would attribute the decline to the ECB taking an extraordinary policy action. I didn’t see that listed explicitly here as a reason.  So should I put that in the category of “Other AFE Outlook”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. Mr. Bullard is simply asking for clarification and additional information regarding a specific factor (ECB's policy action) that he did not see explicitly listed in the exhibit.


Passage number 49.
 MS. LOGAN.  That’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a simple affirmation of agreement.


Passage number 50.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So that’s what they’re referring to there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating what a certain reference is referring to.


Passage number 51.
 MS. LOGAN.  Some of them may be referring to that.  I think others could be different, but I think those who would put a lot of weight on the ECB explanation would put it in that category.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the possibility of different interpretations, but there is no specific disagreement or argument being made.


Passage number 52.
 MR. BULLARD. As opposed to, say, China or something else.  Oh, China wouldn’t be AFE.  Sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply contains a statement made by Mr. Bullard and an apology for a mistake.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 53.
 MS. LOGAN. I think that China would be “reserve accumulation,” mostly.  But I guess, the stories they tell would be mostly reserve accumulation, which does show some difference between the dealer and the buy side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Logan, believes that China's stories would primarily be about reserve accumulation. However, she acknowledges that there may be some difference between the dealer (presumably someone involved in financial markets) and the buy side (presumably someone who invests in assets) in the stories they tell about China. This suggests a disagreement or difference of opinion regarding the nature of China's activities.


Passage number 54.
 MR. BULLARD. Okay. My interpretation has been that the ECB has been contemplating extraordinary action.  They finally came through on it and that’s been at least a major factor.  So that’s consistent with what’s being said here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker's interpretation aligns with what is being said in the text.


Passage number 55.
 MS. LOGAN.  Yes.  I cited the longer-run target rate and then also, I think, the ECB—I talked a little bit about that playing a role.  As those rates have come down significantly, it’s affected rates globally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about how the decrease in interest rates has had a global impact.


Passage number 56.
 MR. BULLARD. Okay.  Very good.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing appreciation and gratitude, indicating that everything is satisfactory.


Passage number 57.
 MR. POTTER.  China is still buying a tremendous amount of securities each day as well.   CHAIR YELLEN.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 58.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you.  I want to follow up on President Rosengren’s question as well, and I want to take a little different variation.  I think you were alluding to this, Simon.  If we stuck to government-only money market funds and excluded the prime funds, for example.  If I look across the quarter, look across the usage, one of the things that we’ve witnessed is this sharp uptake at the end of quarters.  Presumably, I’m guessing, there’s some balance sheet dressing that’s going on by primarily the prime funds, or is there a usage variation in these periods when you’ve gotten these spikes for the prime funds and the government-only funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a question and explores different variations and possibilities.


Passage number 59.
 MR. POTTER.  It’s not balance sheet dressing by the prime money market funds.  It’s balance sheet dressing by the counterparties they would usually invest cash with.  So, for example, one of the issues with prime funds is they still invest a lot in European banks effectively, and the European banks, as they get close to quarter-end, tend to reduce the amount of their balance-sheet funds that they’ll offer to the prime fund.  So one of the things that we’ve seen at quarter-end is an increase in take-up in the overnight RRP.  That has meant that RRP rates, despite this big flow of cash into the repo market, haven’t fallen that much because we’ve provided this floor.  And we’ve improved market functioning relative to the repo markets in the United Kingdom, for example, over those month- and quarter-end periods. It’s a difficult question as to why this window-dressing is so powerful and what it means for the regulations in place that banks choose to window-dress so much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage presents information and observations about the practice of balance sheet dressing and its effects on prime money market funds and European banks. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 60.
 MR. PLOSSER.  But it’s the banks as the counterparties, not the prime funds that are doing it.  Interesting.  And your other point then, just to make sure I understand, is that if there is a government-only fund and a prime fund, even in that situation they are part of the same family of funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is simply seeking clarification and understanding from the other person's point.


Passage number 61.
  Your point was that—and Bill was making it—prime funds can actually use the government-only fund as a conduit to— MR. POTTER.  It’s an eligible investment option for the prime fund.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 62.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.  Further questions. [No response]  If not, I need a motion to ratify open market operations.  [No response] Without objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange between Mr. Plosser and Chair Yellen, followed by an absence of response and a request for a motion.


Passage number 63.
 MR. FISCHER. Am I supposed to say something. CHAIR YELLEN. This is an FOMC issue as opposed to a Board issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange of information between Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 64.
 MR. FISHER. So moved, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  This is very subtle, Stan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement between Mr. Fisher and Chair Yellen. Mr. Fisher states that he is moving for something, while Chair Yellen responds with a non-committal statement.


Passage number 65.
  [Laughter] MR. FISCHER. It’s way beyond me.  I’m just a central banker— CHAIR YELLEN.  Let’s move to our discussion, then, on policy normalization, and let me just make a few remarks, if I might, to begin.  First, I’d like to express my appreciation to all of you for the very engaging and productive discussion we had at our last meeting, and I very much want to thank the staff for their excellent support last time and this time as well. We covered a number of issues.  We considerably clarified the area in which we’re likely to find consensus, and we succeeded, I think, in trimming down the range of options appreciably. As we resume our discussion today, let me remind everyone that we have set a goal of clearly articulating to the public our normalization strategy and framework at the time of the September meeting.  This is an important deadline because I consider it essential for us to define concretely and communicate our plans well before the first steps in normalizing policy become appropriate. We will also need to provide clarity about the mechanics of our approach in order  to ease the transition for market participants and to make sure that the required market infrastructure is in place. Meeting this timetable will require our collective focus on some key remaining issues.  In general, I think we’ve agreed that our normalization framework should allow us to deploy our mix of tools relatively flexibly to deal with contingencies that arise. But it also needs to be simple and clear enough that we can convincingly communicate it to the public.  Since interest rate normalization will begin at a time when our balance sheet is quite large, there’s broad consensus that raising the interest rate on excess reserves will be a central part of the rate normalization process. Of course, there are also some additional issues, and I’d like to describe, based on our previous discussion, what I’d characterize as a centrist approach. There seems to be broad, although not unanimous, agreement that the overnight RRP facility should play at least some role in our normalization plans since it would help to provide a more reliable floor for short-term rates than would IOER alone.  Assuming that we do operate this facility during normalization, the spread between the overnight RRP and IOER rates becomes an important issue, and at the last meeting, I heard pretty widespread support for keeping that spread rather wide. We focused on two arguments that favor maintaining a significant spread, perhaps in the neighborhood of the current 20 basis points.  First, I think there is a general desire to preserve trading activity in the federal funds market; and second, given a range of uncertainties and concerns about the overnight RRP facility, there’s a desire to keep that facility modest in size. I hope we can make progress today on a number of important follow-on issues, which are spelled out in the staff memos.  In particular, we need to consider the role of the federal funds, IOER, and overnight RRP rates in both the implementation and communication of monetary  policy.  We need to decide how to limit the financial-stability risks associated with the overnight RRP facility. We have to make choices, as Simon mentioned, relating to the modernization of the federal funds rate.  And we also need to decide on our reinvestment strategy. It’s probably not essential that we reach final agreements today.  Of course, if we do reach agreement on particular issues at today’s meeting, we could convey such progress to the public either through the minutes or tomorrow’s press conference.  However, by the end of the July meeting, I hope we will have settled most of these substantive issues.  That would allow us to finalize a set of revised normalization principles at the September meeting. We had what I thought was a very good discussion and back-and-forth on the issues last time.  I hope that we can again make good use of the Q&A period after the staff presentations to make comments and ask questions that will help us all work through these complicated issues. We will also have a full go-round to make sure we hear everyone’s views on the key remaining issues, and we have purposely started very early today to allow a good deal of time for this discussion.  So with those introductory remarks, let me turn the floor over to the staff.  I think Gretchen is going to begin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is focused on expressing appreciation and setting goals for the future. It also outlines some potential options and considerations for policy normalization, but there is no direct disagreement or contention among the speakers.


Passage number 66.
 MS. LEONARD.  Thank you, Fabio.  Turning to exhibit 4, I will cover options for when to cease or reduce reinvestments, which is another element of your normalization strategy. As noted in your top left panel, the exit principles included in the minutes of the June 2011 FOMC meeting indicated that ceasing or reducing reinvestments would likely be the first step in the process of normalization, and would be followed by modifications to forward guidance, reserve draining operations, and only then an increase in the target federal funds rate; agency securities would likely be sold sometime after that.  Several important changes—noted in the top-right panel—have occurred in the three years since.  They include a substantial increase in securities holdings and excess reserves; the sale of shorter-dated Treasury securities holdings during the Maturity Extension Program; changes in the forward guidance; the Committee’s indication that it no longer expects to sell agency MBS during normalization; and the development of overnight RRPs to help control interest rates with a large balance sheet. As summarized in the next panel, if the economy evolves in line with the staff’s baseline expectations, halting reinvestments six months before liftoff, at liftoff, or sometime after liftoff has relatively limited effects on estimates of the term premium and balance sheet.  Accordingly, in that case, the choice does not materially affect the timing of liftoff or macroeconomic outcomes, nor does it have a discernible effect on projected remittances to the Treasury.  That said, to the extent that the flow of purchases might have an effect on interest rates—a possibility that is not factored into staff models but which some market participants appear to put weight on in the MBS market—announcing a halt in reinvestments may put some upward pressure on MBS rates, which could pass through to primary mortgage rates. As noted in the middle-right panel, there are several possible options for timing an end to reinvestments as part of a revised normalization strategy—before liftoff, after liftoff, or coincident with liftoff.  All else equal, ceasing reinvestments prior to liftoff—the first option—would normalize the size of the balance sheet sooner than in the other options and would slightly reduce the level of reserves prior to liftoff.  In the staff’s current baseline, reserves are drained to a lesser degree (both in dollar terms and as a share of the balance sheet) than the staff originally projected in mid-2011.  Because even passive reductions in security holdings are a means for removing policy accommodation, the Committee would presumably stop reinvesting principal payments only when it judged that conditions were appropriate to begin to tighten policy. However, if you are concerned that reductions in securities holdings might have an unpredictable effect on interest rates that could potentially delay liftoff, you may prefer to maintain reinvestments until sometime after liftoff—which is a second option.  You also might prefer initiating policy normalization with an increase in your target for short-term interest rates in part because you have indicated that you plan to use short-term interest rates as your primary tool for adjusting the stance of monetary policy.  Moreover, you might want to gain confidence in the sustainability of the tightening cycle, halting reinvestments only once you were confident that the decision was unlikely to be reversed.  Some policymakers may judge it appropriate to maintain reinvestments beyond liftoff in order to limit the risk of a too-large tightening of financial conditions upon liftoff, and potentially to enhance flexibility to provide more accommodation if the economy weakens during the tightening cycle.  But other policymakers may be concerned that an end to reinvestments could be delayed for a substantial period, implying that the balance sheet would not begin to shrink until much later than they judge appropriate.  If you decide to end reinvestments after liftoff, you might want to adopt a trigger or threshold relative to your interest rate target, economic conditions, or time.  Depending on the details of the approach taken, communications associated with an after-liftoff option could be more complicated than in the other options for stopping reinvestment. A third option would be to halt reinvestments at the same time as liftoff.  Taking actions on interest rates and the balance sheet simultaneously offers simplicity in communications, but also could make the initial tightening move less gradual than starting with either tool first. Of course, ceasing reinvestments entirely is not the only alternative to reinvesting all payments of principal.  As seen in the bottom panel, the monthly runoff of securities from the SOMA portfolio is quite variable in the case of Treasury securities, which start to mature in size in 2016. It is also subject to prepayment uncertainty in the case of agency MBS (for which modeled estimates are shown in the chart).  If you wished to see a steady decline in the size of the portfolio, you could smooth the path by conducting partial reinvestments in months when runoff was particularly large, perhaps augmenting this strategy with sales of short-dated securities in months when runoff was small.  Separately, you could use reinvestment policies to shift the allocation of assets within the portfolio—for example, by diverting MBS reinvestments into Treasury securities to expedite a return to an all-Treasury portfolio, or vice versa to provide ongoing support to the housing market. The final page of your handout provides a copy of the questions that were distributed with the staff memos on normalization.  You may want to address these questions in your contributions during the go-round.  Thank you, Madam Chair, that completes our prepared remarks.  We’d be happy to take questions. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  Let’s go to a question and answer period, and as last time, I urge two-handed interventions when topics come up where there are a number of issues that would benefit from back-and-forth.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and options for when to cease or reduce reinvestments as part of a normalization strategy.


Passage number 67.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Debby, I think this question is probably primarily directed toward you because it’s about reinvestment.  As I read the memo and listened to your presentation today, I came away with the impression—but correct me if I’m wrong—that you collectively think that the most significant effect of a decision to end reinvestment would be a signaling effect rather than a real economic effect.  I know there’s the continued stock−flow debate, but apart from that, is it essentially a signaling device.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and seeking confirmation of his understanding from Debby.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 68.
 MS. LEONARD. We think the signaling effect that this should have on short-term rates probably wouldn’t depend on which tool you use, but there is uncertainty around what kind of signaling effect an announcement on reinvestments could have in regards supply  For example, for MBS, there’s some endogenous response to our purchases, and that creates at least some uncertainty. We don’t think that’s necessarily a big issue now, as we’ve been tapering purchases in a very predictable way, but we hear from market participants that there could be a flow effect that is associated with the signal we send about our purchase plans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there is uncertainty around what kind of signaling effect an announcement on reinvestments could have in regards to supply, especially with MBS purchases. The uncertainty and differing views from market participants suggest contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
 MR. TARULLO.  I guess I had been under the impression, just listening to market participants, that regardless of on which part of the yield curve the ceasing of reinvestment would have the most noticeable effects, that the cessation of reinvestments would be read more generally as a prelude to tightening or, if it came after liftoff, it would be read as sort of a ramping up of tightening.  And I guess I’m asking whether the Desk shares that general view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is contention or disagreement. Mr. Tarullo expresses his impression about the market participants' view on the cessation of reinvestments, but he questions whether the Desk shares that view. This suggests a difference in perspective or opinion between Mr. Tarullo and the Desk.


Passage number 70.
   MR. POTTER.  Based on last year’s events, it seems that we can say things that should not be that big of news to markets, and they take it as a viewpoint of the reaction function.  I do think what Debby was trying to put in play there is if you’re looking at early next year, then the main focus will be on when the first increase in the policy rate happens.  So that’s what the memo looked at.  There is potentially more signaling there.  Ex post, it is also true that if you kept reinvesting, it would be a sign of all clear to stop the reinvestments at that point, which might be either good for you or bad for you at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their interpretation of events and discussing potential implications.


Passage number 71.
 MR. TARULLO.  Right.  That’s very helpful, and that actually gets to the question I had about the decision on reinvestment.  It seems as though there’s a certain contingency associated with this.  That is, it seems to me it’s a little hard to judge now when that signal would either be minimized or maximized, as we would most prefer.  So I was a bit concerned about the prospect of setting forth a chronology similar to what we did in June 2011, which had cessation of reinvestment clearly at a particular stage in the normalization process.  Can you address a bit whether that concern is outweighed by the need for clarity to markets, or do you think it’s a legitimate concern and thus an argument for not committing ourselves now to where it would fit within the sequence of normalization policies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing a concern and seeking clarification on a specific issue, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 72.
 MR. POTTER. Last year, when we tried to give clarity, it didn’t work too well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement suggests that giving clarity did not succeed in the previous year, indicating an argument or disagreement about the effectiveness of that approach.


Passage number 73.
 MR. TARULLO.  It was a lot of clarity. It was like a blinding light.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or contradictory statements. Instead, it describes the level of clarity experienced by Mr. Tarullo using a simile.


Passage number 74.
  [Laughter] MR. POTTER.  This is a little bit different.  You saw how diffuse expectations are for when reinvestments end.  I think we would take seriously, surprisingly after all this time, the flow effects just a little bit in the MBS market.  And one of the issues the memo tried to address is that we own a lot of mortgage-backed securities.  So our decision about whether to reinvest or  not could be quite a large signal for that market , which is, I think, the second point that Debby was trying to make. This is a result of the asset purchases that we’ve done.  We own—what was the share of the outstanding stock.—something like one-third of the mortgage-backed securities. And if we limit it to the set of securities that we are actually buying, then it is about 40 percent—so a significant presence in that market.  I think over the next two months, the reinvestments will be larger than the new purchases that we’re making.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the potential impact of the Federal Reserve's decision about whether to reinvest or not on the mortgage-backed securities market.


Passage number 75.
 MS. LEONARD.  I could add to that, Simon.  With MBS, given the uncertainty as to what prepayments will look like in the future, too, there’s some uncertainty as to exactly how much will be rolling off our balance sheet and what risk we’re putting back into the market over time. CHAIR YELLEN.  A two-hander—President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. Both speakers are discussing the uncertainty and potential risks associated with MBS (Mortgage-Backed Securities). The statement by Ms. Leonard adds to what Chair Yellen said previously, indicating agreement or amplification of the same point.


Passage number 76.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Sorry, could I just add something.  Governor Tarullo, I think a key question that you face is how you describe when it will be that you will want to end reinvestment.  And as I think you were suggesting a moment ago, it probably would be better to not be too crisp and clear about what the timing is expected to be and instead condition that on some set of economic outcomes that would suggest it was then appropriate to begin not reinvesting or reducing the amount of reinvestment.  Perhaps there would be some intermediate step, as Debby described.  But I think being a little bit too crisp and too clear, as we learned last year, can make people think you’re on a forced march to do it, and that, maybe, is where you get an adverse reaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering a suggestion to Governor Tarullo on how to approach the timing of ending reinvestment.


Passage number 77.
 MR. TARULLO.  Are you saying—when you’re cautioning against being too crisp or clear about the when, do you mean just in absolute terms or do you mean even relative to other normalization steps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification on the meaning of a statement made by the person being addressed.


Passage number 78.
 MR. ENGLISH. Well, I think relative is okay.  I mean in absolute terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. English, expresses his opinion that using the term "relative" is acceptable, but also acknowledges the possibility of using the term "absolute." This indicates that he is open to multiple perspectives rather than engaging in a disagreement.


Passage number 79.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.  Thank you.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply consists of one person thanking another person.


Passage number 80.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Just about the flow effects, Simon, I was looking at exhibit 3, at the option-adjusted spreads.  If I look at those prior to when we started reducing purchases in MBS this past December and today, they have gone up and down, but they are kind of where they were before we started reducing purchases.  So should I interpret that as maybe the flow effect isn’t having that big an effect on the spreads or what should I take away from that picture.  Because we are buying a lot less now than we were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is simply asking for clarification and interpretation of the data.


Passage number 81.
 MR. POTTER.  That is true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter's statement is acknowledged as true without any dispute or opposing viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 82.
 MR. PLOSSER.  And the spreads are about the same now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "And the spreads are about the same now" is a matter-of-fact observation about a situation.


Passage number 83.
 MR. POTTER.  There’s a lot of forces that move around the option-adjusted spread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or disagreement regarding the topic of "forces that move around the option-adjusted spread." It simply states that there are multiple forces involved.


Passage number 84.
  MR. PLOSSER.  There’s a lot of forces that move around lots of interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that there are various forces that influence interest rates.


Passage number 85.
 MR. POTTER. That’s true, and that’s one of the issues that we face with the large-scale asset purchase program.  It is probably only contributing 20 to 30 percent of the fluctuations we see.  So we look at experiments.  We know when we announced the $40 billion per month, that had an effect which was a little outsized at first, which is probably related to the dynamics of the mortgage market.  The tripwire for Vice Chairman Dudley’s speech tells you something similar to that as well. Now, I can construct calculations in which the market’s view of the stock ofmortgage-backed securities changed sufficiently following that speech to justify that fall in the option-adjusted spread.  But I wouldn’t put 100 percent weight on that type of model. The issue that you are facing as you move toward liftoff, the situation you don’t want to have is an abrupt tightening of financial conditions.  And we are putting a little bit of weight on the MBS flow effect as potentially producing that, if you announced a reinvestment policy that was surprising to the market.  As you can see in panel 17, the market has moved a little bit, but it’s a little bit all over the place.  Some people will be surprised right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing various factors and their potential effects on the market, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 86.
 MR. ENGLISH. Just one point to make.  The effect of Vice Chairman Dudley’s speech in markets isn’t really a flow effect.  We didn’t change our flow of anything.  We were talking about a change in flow being further in the future, and that affects the stock of the securities we’re going to be holding for quite a long time, potentially.  And I think that also had an effect.  So I’m not sure how much I want to read this as telling me that there’s a flow effect and how much I want to be saying it’s telling me there are stock effects and other market dynamics, and we are now expected to hold more MBS for longer than we were before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. English discussing the effects of Vice Chairman Dudley's speech in markets. There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 87.
 MR. PLOSSER.  That’s what I was trying to get at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their previous attempt to convey a point or idea.


Passage number 88.
  It’s more than just sort of— MR. ENGLISH.  It’s hard to be confident of how to interpret that. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard, you had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 89.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This is a question for Debby.  You argued that our tapering, because it has been on a schedule, has not had very much impact in markets. So, by analogy, could I argue that a managed reinvestment policy in which you allowed the balance sheet to shrink at some fixed rate over time would be equally smooth and equally predictable in markets, and that, there again, you would get very small effect or no effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question being asked by Mr. Bullard to Debby.


Passage number 90.
   MS. LEONARD.  We think that could certainly help.  That doesn’t necessarily mean by not doing it that you risk having the opposite effect.  I think with the amounts that we’re looking at for reinvestments, it’s one thing to go from $40 billion a month to zero.  Depending on how much you have coming off in any month, that may or may not have as large an effect, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Leonard is simply providing her opinion on the potential effects of a particular action, without challenging or disputing any previous statement.


Passage number 91.
 MR. BULLARD. Yes. So what I’m saying is if you look at this picture at the bottom of exhibit 4, that’s saying that it’s highly variable if you just cease reinvestments altogether.  But if you manage that process so that the balance sheet goes down in an orderly way, then evidently, or I guess, you would get the same kind of effect that we’ve gotten from our taper, which is that that gets fully incorporated into market expectations.  There are no surprises. I think something like the speech by Vice Chairman Dudley does create something of a surprise in markets, because they are not quite sure how that is going to be managed in the future.  But then, we could announce a schedule like this, is what I’m saying, and then you think it would work out smoothly if we went in that direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting a possible strategy and suggesting that it could work smoothly.


Passage number 92.
 MS. LEONARD.  That’s right, to provide that kind of clarity, I think then the market can slowly adjust and find other marginal buyers as we slowly step out of the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a solution and expressing their opinion on how the market can adjust.


Passage number 93.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher, did you have a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not indicate any verbal dispute or disagreement between Mr. Bullard and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 94.
 MR. FISHER. I did.  Simon, going back to your 30 percent number, in your own mind, do you contemplate us conducting reinvestment in order to maintain that ratio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, confirms that he did contemplate conducting reinvestment to maintain the 30 percent ratio mentioned by Simon.


Passage number 95.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s what the reinvestment would do—it would maintain that ratio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is simply explaining the purpose and effect of reinvestment.


Passage number 96.
 MR. FISHER.  Unless we agreed on some kind of adjustment of the reinvestment rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is suggesting the need for an agreement on adjusting reinvestment rates, but there is no mention of anyone opposing or disagreeing with his statement.


Passage number 97.
 MR. POTTER.  That is subject to the rate at which the outstanding stock is growing.  The net issuance has been quite small for a while, as you know.  We would expect, then, that in  –2016, that would start to grow, both as you got more activity in the housing market and house prices went up, the limit becomes a smaller share.  But effectively, if you reinvest the principal paydowns, you are keeping your share of the outstanding stock reasonably constant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the expected growth of the outstanding stock, and there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 98.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman Dudley, did you have a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a polite exchange between Mr. Fisher and Chair Yellen, with Mr. Fisher expressing gratitude and Chair Yellen addressing Vice Chairman Dudley.


Passage number 99.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, a two-hander.  On this issue of the announcement effect, I think it really depends a lot on market position.  This issue of distinguishing between flows and stocks is very difficult, because it is also a question of, how does this signal affect what portfolios people actually want to hold.  And so you can have a signal that has a pretty large effect on interest rates—you know, last summer is a good example of that.  Even though it doesn’t change how the balance sheet is actually likely to evolve.  So I think market positioning is really a big factor here, and I think we do not want to lose sight of that. Now, in terms of Governor Tarullo’s observation about what do we need to say, my own view is I think we do have to say something, because we basically said in the old exit principles that we’re going to do the reinvestment ahead of raising short-term rates. And I think to say that we have no idea now, is probably not a very good outcome.  But I do agree with Governor Tarullo that we don’t want to say more than what we actually know.  We certainly want to keep flexibility, because when you would want to time the end of reinvestments could depend on a whole host of factors, depending on what the shape of the yield curve looks like, what the strength of the economy is, what is happening in the housing sector.  So you might want to maintain a fair amount of flexibility in terms of the precise timing. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota, did you have a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different factors and perspectives related to the announcement effect and the timing of reinvestments, but there is no clear disagreement or debate. The speaker acknowledges different viewpoints and suggests the need for flexibility in decision-making.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 100.
   MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I did.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  And it actually builds on what Vice Chairman Dudley was just saying.  I understand the desire to retain flexibility, but I guess I took a slightly different lesson from the events of 2013, which is that the Committee’s desire to retain flexibility in September 2012 left markets with uncertainty about what we meant about sufficient improvement in the labor market outlook.  And then our decisions were viewed as containing information about our reaction function, about how hawkish or dovish this Committee is.  And so that’s a cost of retaining flexibility—that your decisions are not viewed as being necessarily conditional on economic outcomes, but rather on the makeup and the inclinations of the Committee.  My own view of the events of 2013 is that we weren’t sufficiently clear in September 2012, and that’s what led to the challenges.  And I think we should be careful in thinking that through as we are thinking about communicating in the future. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker disagrees with the idea that retaining flexibility in monetary policy is beneficial. They believe that the events of 2013 showed that the market was uncertain about the Committee's intentions because of the desire for flexibility. They argue that this lack of clarity led to challenges and that the Committee should be careful in communicating in the future.


Passage number 101.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had several questions about MBS, which have now been fully answered.  But I have one I’d like to ask about Treasuries.  There is quite a bit of volatility in Treasury volumes coming up in 2016 as the MEP cycles out.  I assume these are the kind of volumes that we would expect the Treasury market, in ordinary times, to be able to absorb without great difficulty.  Is that the case.  And, if not, have we thought about ways to mitigate that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question.


Passage number 102.
 MS. LEONARD.  If we’re not rolling it over, this is an amount that we think the market would be able to absorb, and that Treasury would also be able to make plans for in their primary issuance and be able to accommodate in their refundings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the market's ability to absorb a certain amount and the Treasury's ability to make plans accordingly.


Passage number 103.
 MR. POWELL.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between Mr. Powell and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 104.
   MR. FISCHER.  I want to slightly change the focus, and that’s why it was one-handed.  I have a series of questions.  First, we are thinking about whether we want a system in which we are going to use the overnight RRP and IOER, and then make a decision about what we want to do with the federal funds rate.  What information did you get about the predictability of the federal funds rate from this experiment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a change in focus and asking a series of questions.


Passage number 105.
 MR. POTTER.  It’s printed somewhere between 7 and 10 basis points.  It’s a little bit firmer over the last week.  The reason we said it was an untested approach is that we don’t know whether changing the rate on the overnight RRP would lead to changes in flows in the federal funds market, which would allow us to then control the fed funds rate.  We think that the logic suggests that we would be able to do that.  I don’t know, Bill, if you want to add some more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While the passage discusses uncertainty and potential outcomes, there is no explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply presenting their thoughts and acknowledging potential challenges.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 106.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think that’s right, that the funds rate has continued to move with other short-term market rates, as Simon discussed.  We think that the overnight RRP rate has set a floor for market rates that has been reasonably good in the period when there was a reduction in bill issuance and rates fell.  I think that what we have learned is really about control and the control that we can get from the overnight RRP rate.  But as Simon indicated, particularly if you were trying to hit a point target, the question of, if the funds rate is 5 basis points or 7 basis points below your point target, how much do you move the overnight RRP rate to get it there. How quickly do markets adjust to the higher floor.  And so how rapidly does the funds rate get there. And also, there is the constraint that if you want to keep the funds market more or less trading as it is trading now, you can’t raise the overnight RRP rate too far, too close to the IOER rate, because that will ultimately undermine the trading in the funds market. So there are just a bunch of things that we don’t really know, and trying to implement an approach in which there is a target for the funds rate that you are trying to hit by moving theovernight RRP rate would require some learning by doing.  And potentially some of that learning would be, do you want to also be constrained by keeping a reasonably large spread between IOER and overnight RRP.  There may be times when you can’t hit your target, and you just have to live with some uncertainty of where the funds rate will be relative to target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage discusses the uncertainty and potential challenges of implementing an approach to hit a target for the funds rate by moving the overnight RRP rate. It mentions that there are many unknown factors and constraints, such as the speed of market adjustments and the potential undermining of trading in the funds market. It suggests that there may be times when the target cannot be hit, leading to uncertainty about the funds rate's position relative to the target. This indicates a level of disagreement or contention in terms of the feasibility and effectiveness of such an approach.


Passage number 107.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  So the next question I have is, if we had never had the federal funds rate, and we run without worrying about the federal funds rate for two or three years, and the system more or less works, and let’s say there’s a lot of turnover on this Committee, so nobody remembers why we used the federal funds rate.  [Laughter]  Isn’t this a strange thing that you want to focus and go back to.  It’s a market between European banks and Federal Home Loan Banks.  Why would you put that in the middle of this system if you were reinventing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question being asked by Mr. Fischer.


Passage number 108.
 MR. ENGLISH. It’s currently this somewhat idiosyncratic market.  But in normal times—and we hope to get back to normal times—it will not be.  It will be, again, the rate at which DIs are lending to each other in an overnight market, and it will be their marginal cost of funds, and it actually seems to me an attractive rate to target. The marginal cost of funds for DIs, it’s a relatively small market in which we control a lot of the parameters, so that we can operate in that market and control rates with a relatively small balance sheet, relatively small operations, and depend on the DIs basically to arbitrage that into other short-term market rates. I think it has real appeal as a long-term way of implementing policy.  That’s why we ended up, back in the 1980s, using that structure for implementing policy. If the Committee were confident they didn’t want to go back to that, then I would agree with you that currently this is a somewhat strange market.  Why are we twisting ourselves around to not unwind that market. Well, I think the discussion around this table has suggested that there are people who want to go back, down the road, to implementing policy with the funds   rate.  And that, I think, suggests it is at least costly to step away from that rate for a while, allow that market to potentially get very small and idiosyncratic, and then try to come back to it later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses their opinion and provides reasoning for it, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 109.
 MR. POTTER. Can I just add one thing.  We need some market rates that we would actually look at to see whether the policy is actually working through from the other rates that we are setting.  And it is pretty natural for the FOMC to look at something like the effective federal funds rate as the market rate that it might be looking at, just because that’s what we used before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 110.
 MR. FISCHER.  Well, just one last comment.  As I understand it—this is academic knowledge—actually hitting the federal funds rate is a complicated story.  And if you were starting to tell that story, it would sound no less complicated than the stories we have about using the federal funds rate and all that, and everybody has to get up in the morning and figure out exactly how much liquidity to put into the market, and so forth.  So is it a very natural policy rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Fischer about the complexity of hitting the federal funds rate and the decision-making process involved in determining the policy rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 111.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I actually disagree with that in normal times, because in normal times, as I said, the funds market is small, we control a lot of the parameters through reserve requirements and through our open market operations, and we have pretty good visibility into, for example, what the Treasury balance is going to be.  So we can make pretty small adjustments and target the funds rate very closely, and we understand that market very well. I would be at least hesitant and would want to think pretty hard about shifting to a system in which we’re implementing policy in an ongoing way through an RRP rate and our operations are overnight RRPs.  I think that’s an implementation process that is feasible, but you would have to do it with a much bigger balance sheet, because potentially you’d be doing a lot of RRPs to push around what is a very, very large market.  And it would just be, I think, a very different set of special factors that we would have to learn about, and we’d learn about them, and we’dfigure them out, and we could do that.  But it is a very different way of implementing policy, and it would have serious consequences for the balance sheet and the size of our operations.  I know Simon will have more to say on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. English, expresses hesitation and disagrees with implementing policy through an RRP rate and overnight RRPs, suggesting that it would require a larger balance sheet and have serious consequences for the balance sheet and the size of their operations.


Passage number 112.
 MR. POTTER.  I don’t think we have to worry about checks getting stuck on planes anymore, the way that check processing works.  So that’s good.  That simplifies one part of some of the issues that we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a belief or opinion without presenting any opposing viewpoints or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 113.
 MR. FISCHER.  Now we have to worry about the computers being hacked.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Now we have to worry about the computers being hacked" indicates a shared concern or consensus rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 114.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s right. It’s a lot easier than it would have been 25 years ago. I do think that when you describe to people what that operating system was, it is not the most obvious operating system that we evolved to.  However, it worked really well, and it achieved the goals of the FOMC for a substantial period of time. Regulatory reform and other changes in the financial system, which I think we discussed at the last meeting, make me, I think, a little less confident that we could go back to that nice position in which, each day, we could hit the target basically by injecting a very small amount of cash, you know, one three-thousandths of what the balance sheet is right now, and whether we’d really want to do that to affect financial conditions. I think Vice Chairman Dudley was really clear at the last meeting that none of you really care about which rate we target each day on the Desk.  What you care about is the impact you are going to have on general financial conditions.  And Bill English gave, I think, the real strength for the federal funds rate, which is that targeting it was very effective in moving financial conditions around.  What we don’t know, when we get back to 2021, 2022, whenever it happens, and we’ve got a smaller balance sheet, whether that market will be as effective as some other markets, given the change in the financial system, particularly driven by regulation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion and discussing the potential challenges and uncertainties in the future.


Passage number 115.
MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer is thanking someone, and Chair Yellen responds with "okay" and Vice Chairman Dudley's title.


Passage number 116.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There is no reason, though, why we have to make this decision today about what we’re going back to.  It seems to me that the only decision we would probably want to make is, do we not want to rule out one or the other.  As long as both are still viable, it seems that it’s more sensible to learn more.  I mean, the world is going to be quite different in 2021, 2022.  I don’t see why a decision needs to be made today.  I mean, Bill, do you think we have to decide or in any way pre-commit ourselves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the possibility of making a decision and suggesting that there is no need to decide immediately.


Passage number 117.
 MR. ENGLISH.  No, not at all.  But I think what all of you have said in the past is that you don’t want to close doors.  And I think it would be at least pretty close to closing a door, for example, if the Committee went with the rate on overnight RRP very close to IOER; it should then not expect the federal funds market to function, at least in its traditional way.  And if all of the communication about policy was in terms of IOER and overnight RRP, then I think it would be difficult to go back to something like the pre-crisis structure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. English expressing his opinion and observations.


Passage number 118.
 MR. POTTER.  So, Bill, not to disagree [laughter], but if we got the overnight RRP close to the rate of interest on excess reserves, one possibility is that we would get back the traditional fed funds market.  What we have right now is a market that we don’t want someone to write a long newspaper story on about how the effective rate is constructed, because it is basically FHLBs taking money out of their bank accounts with the Fed, giving it to a foreign banking organization that puts it back into a bank account with the Fed and earns 25 basis points.  That’s a pretty unusual market.  It’s a very efficient deposit market. We had a very efficient market before for sharing liquidity across banks.  Both of them seem to work in terms of getting your intent through to financial market conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement and explanation of a current market situation with no conflicting opinions presented.


Passage number 119.
  MR. LACKER.  Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 120.
 MR. LACKER.  Two observations on the line of questioning that Governor Fischer initiated.  One is that under the old regime, when targeting the fed funds rate, there was this two-week window in which DIs had to hit their reserves target.  It worked by itself.  We only really needed to hit the target the last day.  It was the expectation of that that made the funds rate equal the target for all the other days in the two-week maintenance period.  A lot has changed, but the fact that we were targeting the federal funds rate is what led it to behave the way it did.  It is not obvious that now—when we’re not implementing a point target for the funds rate—provides good evidence about how the relationship between the RP rate and the funds rate would work if we were targeting the funds rate. I’d also point out that, in the old regime, the spread between the RP rate and the funds rate was tremendously variable.  You know, it was above 15 basis points, below 15 basis points, above and below very frequently.  And it didn’t seem to bother us, and as you said, we had effective control over the broad set of market interest rates. So the nature of these spreads is something that is very regime-dependent.  And just making an inference about what a point target for the funds rate would be like is difficult to do. About whether we need to decide our long-run framework or not, we’re building some machinery and we’re raising some expectations.  And some market participants are building business models on the availability of a Fed RRP facility.  And I raised this point last fall.  We are raising expectations, and we are raising adjustment costs.  We are inducing people to undertake investments that would be costly to reverse, and the prospect of those costs has the ability to kind of stay our hand, and make us reluctant to back away from offering RRPs on the  scale and scope that we are offering them now. This is why I raised the question at the beginning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly a series of observations and statements made by Mr. Lacker.


Passage number 121.
 MR. POTTER. Can I just make one little point. The fact that we had a lot of control means that, if people know you have a lot of control, you don’t necessarily have to do that much to achieve the point target.  In the situation we’re in right now, people might doubt the precision of control that we have on the federal funds market.  So announcing a point target, we’d probably have to have a proof of concept that we can get the effective federal funds rate to hit that target with a reasonable amount of ease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is simply stating that having control over the federal funds market may make it easier to achieve a point target, but people may doubt the precision of that control in the current situation.


Passage number 122.
 MR. LACKER.  I’d say a third thing—so it could be that IOER is quite effective.  But if we choose another thing that has a fixed relationship to IOER, and announce that that’s the thing we are changing, it’s not clear everything is going to work out just the same way, even though if you looked at it, the funds rate would look like a peculiar market to claim you’re targeting, as Governor Fischer pointed out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is discussing the possibility of IOER being effective and the potential challenges of targeting a fixed relationship to IOER.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 123.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Can I just add a thought in response to what you said on building expectations about overnight RRP.  I think the Committee can choose to build expectations or not.  In particular, one could imagine in September saying that we are going to use overnight RRP as a tool during normalization, but we don’t necessarily intend to use it in the long run. And I can see a path forward that would involve, let’s say, raising IOER and overnight RRP basically in parallel as you tighten, raising the target range for the federal funds rate, maybe later on you go to a point target.  Over time, the balance sheet is shrinking.  Over time, the overnight RRP isn’t as helpful and isn’t as important in applying a floor.  The setting of IOER is sufficient to pull rates higher. So you allow the overnight RRP rate to fall relative to market rates, relative to IOER, and over time it becomes essentially irrelevant.  Nobody really wants it  because the rate on it is lousy relative to market rates, and so it goes away.  I don’t see that there isn’t a process for proceeding whereby you could use overnight RRP as a tool to give you confidence that you can raise rates when the time comes to raise rates, but not make it part of a long-run toolkit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a potential disagreement regarding the use of overnight RRP as a long-term tool in monetary policy. The speaker suggests that while it can be used initially to build expectations and confidence, over time it may become irrelevant and unnecessary. However, it is not clear if this view is shared by others or if there is any contention within the Committee.


Passage number 124.
 MS. WEINBACH.  I was just going to add one thing along those lines, that in the April memos the staff raised the issue of the consideration of how big of a footprint you would like to have in the long run in the nonbank sector.  And the conversation so far has mainly been about control and efficacy and transitioning back and forth.  But in the long run, you might have some concerns about possibly relying quite heavily on nonbanks, paying them interest.  That gets attention politically, maybe, and you may just have some longer-run considerations that mean that you could rely on the overnight RRP facility in the short term but not necessarily forever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing considerations and potential concerns about relying heavily on nonbanks in the long run.


Passage number 125.
 MR. LACKER.  Madam Chair, may I follow up.  There was this point where, in the sequence you sketched out, in which we discover that the overnight RRP rate isn’t that necessary.  Then, we reduce it.  I’m unclear on how we would learn that before we would reduce it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on how they would come to the decision of reducing the overnight RRP rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 126.
 MR. ENGLISH. Within the range between overnight RRP and IOER, market rates would move up toward IOER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that market rates would move towards IOER, which could imply that there is disagreement or contention about the specific range between overnight RRP and IOER.


Passage number 127.
  As the amount of reserves goes down, as IOER is the more effective tool— MR. LACKER. I mean, we know that it’s about a 15 or 20 basis point spread you need to arbitrage IOER and the ON RRP rate.  We have a lot of information that points to something in that range.  So if you keep the interest rate on ON RRPs at 15 or 20 basis points, you are not going to see whether, without that floor, the arbitrage is effective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the information and facts.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 128.
MR. ENGLISH.  I agree, at the beginning, when you raise rates in the way I described, you wouldn’t see whether the overnight RRP was doing you all that much good.  It might be that just raising IOER with no overnight RRP would provide a sufficient magnet, would move rates up along with IOER.  You would not see that in the process I described.  You would ultimately see, as the balance sheet shrank and the amount of reserves shrank, market rates moving up within that range—that, say, 20 basis point range between overnight RRP and IOER.  And, as it moved higher, you would have less take-up on the overnight RRP facility.  It would just be less important as a way of providing a floor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: Mr. English suggests that raising IOER without the overnight RRP facility could be sufficient to move rates up. However, the implication is that the process described by Mr. English would not show this relationship, suggesting a disagreement with the effectiveness of the overnight RRP facility.


Passage number 129.
  You wouldn’t get a lot of dollars coming into overnight RRPs and— MR. LACKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is stating a fact about the amount of dollars coming into overnight RRPs.


Passage number 130.
  How much balance sheet shrinkage would we need— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation:
The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states a question and the statement of Vice Chairman Dudley.


Passage number 131.
  Eventually, some banks would be short of reserves, and if they’re— MR. LACKER.  Yes.  But wouldn’t we have to go down to like, $100 billion in reserves to get there.  I mean, that would take a long time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers seem to be in general agreement about the potential shortage of reserves in banks and the time it would take to reach that point. The interruption by Mr. Lacker does not indicate disagreement but rather a continuation of the conversation.


Passage number 132.
 MR. POTTER.  A hundred trillion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a numerical value without any conflicting opinions or contrasting ideas.


Passage number 133.
 Do you mean— MR. LACKER.  I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is apologizing, which indicates a polite conversation.


Passage number 134.
 MR. POTTER.  Did you say “$100 billion” or “$100 trillion”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents a question about a statement the person made and seeks clarification.


Passage number 135.
 MR. LACKER.  I said “$100 billion.”  I didn’t say “$100 trillion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention between individuals. It is a statement by Mr. Lacker clarifying his previous statement.


Passage number 136.
”  That our balance sheet—[Laughter] MR. ENGLISH.  I don’t think we know exactly, as the balance sheet shrinks and the amount of reserves goes down, where it is that rates are going to begin to move up in this range.  But I don’t think it’s going to be $100 billion.  I think that, at $100 billion, the funds rate would be trading above IOER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 137.
  MR. LACKER.  That makes sense, but it strikes me it would take a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers seem to agree on the concept mentioned.


Passage number 138.
  We can find out right away by leaving the RRP rate at 5 or 10 basis points when we raise— MR. ENGLISH.  Absolutely.  I agree you could do that experiment, as long as you’re comfortable saying, “Here it is.  It’s D-Day.  We’re raising rates.  We’re going to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply suggests conducting an experiment, and the response agrees with the suggestion and provides support for it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 139.
”  You raise IOER, and rates don’t go up—because they might not—and— MR. LACKER.  So they don’t go up when—you know, for a couple of weeks—so we miss the liftoff by a couple of weeks. We raise the RRP rate at the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "You raise IOER, and rates don’t go up" suggests that there is a difference of opinion on whether increasing the IOER (Interest on Excess Reserves) rate will lead to an increase in overall rates. The response "So they don’t go up when—you know, for a couple of weeks—so we miss the liftoff by a couple of weeks" indicates frustration or disagreement with the idea that rates may not go up immediately after raising the IOER rate.


Passage number 140.
 MR. ENGLISH.  This is clearly an issue before the Committee, but I would be nervous, I guess, that if that happened there would just be a tremendous risk to confidence that markets have in the ability of the Committee to raise rates when the time comes. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher has a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. Mr. English expresses his nervousness about a certain scenario, but it does not indicate any disagreement with Chair Yellen or with any other person mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 141.
 MR. FISHER. Well, with regard to Governor Fischer’s comment about the possible vestigial nature of fed funds, we had a discussion at the last meeting about the contractual obligations being $11 trillion.  Just for point of clarification, did our legal minds give us an answer on that in terms of, if we were to move away from fed funds qua fed funds, does this present a problem from the standpoint of the outstanding $11 trillion in contractual obligations that we discussed at the last meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification about a previous discussion on contractual obligations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 142.
 MR. POTTER.  I think there are a number of issues which are addressed in the previous memo and the memo that you got this time.  The first one is, how robust is the current effective federal funds rate print. And do we feel that we can print the effective federal funds rate in the future, either from the brokered data or the FR-2420.Now, the quality of that as a reference rate could get low if the volume in the markets got low.  And we don’t want a very small cash market supporting $11 trillion of other types of instruments, because that offers lots of incentives for behavior that we don’t want. There is another issue if we try to expand the federal funds rate.  If we take option 2, in which basically we start printing an effective federal funds rate which has the Eurodollar transactions there, whether that could lead to contract frustration claims.  We don’t think that’s a high chance, but that’s a higher risk than under option 1, in which you are printing off the federal funds classic, say, and an overnight bank funding rate, whatever name we go with.  That was one of the issues we addressed in that memo. I don’t think any of the lawyers in the room will be able to give us great confidence on this.  Scott had some reasonably good ideas about how, when we refine the data collection on the FR-2420, we could guide market participants.  I don’t know, Scott, if you want to explain that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, raises several issues and potential risks surrounding the effective federal funds rate and its measurement. He mentions concerns about the robustness of the current rate print, the quality of the reference rate if market volume decreases, and the potential for contract frustration claims if the rate is expanded to include Eurodollar transactions. The uncertainty expressed by Mr. Potter and his statement that the lawyers in the room cannot provide great confidence suggest a level of disagreement or unsettled opinions on these matters.


Passage number 143.
 MR. ALVAREZ.  Yes.  We think that we could do either of the two options.  The advantage of the second option is we think it would have slightly less disruptive effect in the market, the second option being the one in which we continue to print the first effective federal funds rate and create a new rate.  That allows the market to self-adjust without changing the expectations around the first effective fed funds rate. On the other hand, either way the parties in some contracts are going to want to renegotiate their terms based on the information that is available.  Our rate is put out there not as one that we expect the markets to use, but just as information that we make available to the public and that they are able to use as they want.  As long as we give them notice about how we are changing those rates and we give them various options, we give the market more flexibility to adjust its contracts.  And so we think the second one gives it a little more flexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting two options and discussing the advantages of each. They express their belief that the second option provides slightly less disruption in the market and more flexibility for contracts.


Passage number 144.
MR. POTTER.  I think that’s option 1 in the way we described this, Scott, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply seeking clarification on the correct option.


Passage number 145.
 Yes, I think it is, so— MR. ALVAREZ.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply agreeing with the statement made by someone else.


Passage number 146.
 MR. POTTER. One of the problems with option 1, or, as Scott called it, option 2, is we are still printing the effective federal funds rate.  So shifting people from those contracts which have the effective federal funds rate might be harder to do.  And we can’t really say that it’s a very bad rate that we’re printing, but we’d like to persuade people to move to the more robust rate. A lot of the reference-rate work that Governor Powell is going to be involved in is trying to make sure that reference rates are more robust in the future.  And the effective rate that we are currently printing doesn’t have some of the characteristics you’d like of a robust rate. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Powell with a two-hander.  I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen are discussing the challenges and limitations of the current effective federal funds rate and expressing a desire to encourage people to move to a more robust rate in the future. They are in agreement on the need for improvements in reference rates.


Passage number 147.
  President Fisher, do you want to— MR. FISHER.  I’m just trying to decide, does this interfere with our deciding between option 1 and 2. It sounds like option 1 is a little more friendly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. President Fisher is simply seeking clarification on whether or not the statement interferes with the decision between options 1 and 2.


Passage number 148.
 MR. POTTER.  I think it is.  Under option 1, the push to move from the federal funds classic is less big. We could indicate through the data collection that we believe that this overnight bank funding rate is a more robust rate and try to make it clear from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not explicitly present any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Potter expressing his personal opinion or belief about the potential benefits of option 1. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 149.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you very much. CHAIR YELLEN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply shows Mr. Fisher expressing gratitude and addressing Chair Yellen.


Passage number 150.
  Governor Powell, a two-hander, and then we’re going to go back to our— MR. POWELL.  I was going to talk about this in my comments, but because of the LIBOR work that I have been involved in, I’ve spent a fair amount of time on this contractfrustration issue, and my answer to the question of do we need to let the contract frustration issue drive this is “no.”  I mean, there are other things that can be weighed back and forth, but under New York law, it’s a very, very difficult case to make, and we’ve got pretty good facts that just wouldn’t fit within any of the precedents that have been done, in my view.  I no longer have a license to practice law, but that’s my take.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Governor Powell is expressing his opinion on the contract frustration issue, but there is no indication of anyone else presenting a conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 151.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I’m going to switch the topic completely if I could, and I want to talk about the individual rigid caps.  My question is, the purpose of the caps is to deal with broad-based financial-stability concerns.  It’s not really intended to deal with micro issues specific to money market funds. So if we think about the prime money market funds—and Simon mentioned that one-third of their assets are in European bank debt.  Currently most of that bank debt is paying about 25 basis points.  So it’s a way for the prime funds, in effect, to pay for their management fees, but it doesn’t really get passed on to the investor. But if all of a sudden we raise rates when Europe isn’t—say we go up by 25 basis points—then the assets that the prime funds previously were investing in are no longer going to be particularly attractive.  So either investors are going to switch, or the prime funds are going to switch.  That’s going to cause variation in individual funds, both in government funds, potentially, and in the prime funds.  And you might get a situation in which the caps become binding at a time when it was just meant to be a 25-basis-point change that we did that wasn’t done in conjunction with Europe.  And as a result, the micro decisions that the prime funds have been making result in a bunch of these individual rigid caps becoming binding.  And now we have something that’s binding not because of a financial-stability concern, and it could be at the very first time we tighten.  So do you have that concern with the individual caps.  And do you think the individual caps that are so micro-focused run the risk of not really dealing with broader financial-stability concerns, but maybe much more micro concerns than we’re trying to get at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement and an inquiry about the potential impacts and concerns regarding the individual rigid caps on money market funds.


Passage number 152.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  I don’t think we thought in those terms, but following up on that thought, we looked at the variability of take-up of an individual fund.  So if you think of the tradeoff during a potential surge between where you set the size of the cap and the frequency of binding of these caps, the aggregate cap has a better tradeoff.  Because the individual caps are much more volatile, you need a much higher individual cap to get an equal frequency of binding for an individual cap versus an aggregate cap.  So the individual cap has a less favorable tradeoff than the aggregate cap, whereby you can essentially have a lower aggregate cap and at the same time have the same frequency of binding.  That’s one of the arguments I made during the briefing, that you essentially get a better tradeoff between the potential surge and the frequency of the time that you want the caps to bind.  That was one of the arguments in favor of the aggregate cap.  It wasn’t applied to that specific European case, but that was the underlying argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the reasoning behind the use of an aggregate cap instead of individual caps.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 153.
 MR. POTTER.  One issue is, suppose we do use the overnight RRP as part of the liftoff and we do have caps, we should think very carefully about what might happen as we’re first raising money market rates.  It wouldn’t be the case, then, that we’d want to trigger one of the caps, because what we’re trying to do is raise rates and use the overnight RRP to make sure we don’t leave any rates behind.  So I take the point that we should think very carefully, if we do use the overnight RRP, about how flows might change as we are initially raising rates. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman Dudley, a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter raises concerns about triggering the caps when initially raising money market rates, while Chair Yellen seems to be leaning towards Vice Chairman Dudley's perspective. This indicates a difference of opinion on how to handle the situation.


Passage number 154.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m not sure it would work exactly the way you outlined, President Rosengren, in the sense that dollar rates can diverge from euro rates, and the difference between those rates gets reflected through the forward foreign exchange rate.  So even if we raised dollar rates, those European banks would still fund in dollars.  I don’t think that they would vanish from the dollar market to go to the euro market to fund themselves.  So I don’t think you would see this loss of demand just because our rates rose relative to their rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and explaining their reasoning, but there is no clear disagreement or argument with President Rosengren's outlined plan.


Passage number 155.
 MR. ROSENGREN. But their dollar-denominated bank debt in Europe is paying roughly 25 basis points now.  So if you have a choice between buying bank debt of a European bank with a lot of credit risk or a reverse repo with no credit risk at 25 basis points or higher, it does seem that that’s going to cause shifts among either investors or in terms of funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting two different options for investment and stating that the difference in interest rates may cause shifts among investors or funds.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 156.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Those European banks would have to pay more.  That’s the point.  We’re raising rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. English, is arguing that European banks should pay higher rates, while someone else may have a different opinion or stance on the matter.


Passage number 157.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  But the Europeans aren’t raising rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This statement simply states a fact that the Europeans are not raising rates.


Passage number 158.
 [Simultaneous conversation] MR. ENGLISH.  I don’t think that’s relevant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. English simply states his opinion that something is not relevant. There is no contention or disagreement indicated.


Passage number 159.
 MR. POTTER.  I think it is probably relevant depending on how well the swap market works.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Potter is stating his opinion about the relevance of the swap market. There is no indication of disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 160.
  That is a caveat that you— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Assuming the markets work in a reasonably efficient way, you’ve got the big change between dollar rates and European rates, and they’ll still fund in dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a hypothetical scenario or assumption about the relationship between dollar rates and European rates.


Passage number 161.
 MR. KAMIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Kamin without providing any information about him or any topic that could potentially result in contention or disagreement.


Passage number 162.
  I think most of the demand for dollar funding by European banks is to fund their— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Dollar book.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of opinion.


Passage number 163.
 MR. KAMIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only provides a person's name, "MR. KAMIN."


Passage number 164.
 —dollar assets, exactly, and not so much to arbitrage between investments in dollars and investments in euros— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Vice Chairman Dudley is simply stating a fact about the type of assets being referred to.


Passage number 165.
  They can fund in euros and then swap it into dollars or they can fund in dollars, you know, to fund their dollar assets, but I don’t think it has quite— MR. POTTER.  And efficient markets, if they work properly, they should be exactly the same.  They might not be completely efficient at this time. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  We are going back to our one-handed list.  [Laughter] President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is mainly discussing different options for funding in different currencies and the potential efficiency of markets.


Passage number 166.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think everyone will be relieved to know that I’m going back to the line of conversation between Bill English and President Lacker.  [Laughter]  Seriously, I thought it was very important and very interesting.  I think there are two kinds of long runs to think about.  One kind of long run is when interest rates are back to normal.  So interest rates are back in the 3 to 4 percent range, consistent with what the Committee thinks is back to normal.  I think a lot of these issues that seem very important right now, about 20 basis point spreads versus 40 basis point spreads, are basically very important right now because of the fact that we’re going to be raising rates from 25 to 50 basis points.  I think when we’re back to the 3 to 4 percent range, I don’t see those questions as probably being as material. So my question is, how easy would it be to vary the usage of the facility, the overnight reverse repo facility, as we raise rates. If we think about allowing the spread to increase between the two rates as we were to raise rates, is that doable.  Is there a technical problem with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 167.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I don’t think so.  As I said earlier in my remarks to President Lacker, I think as the balance sheet shrinks—so your long run, is it as rates go up or as the balance sheet shrinks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

In this passage, there is a disagreement between Mr. English and President Lacker regarding the effects of the balance sheet shrinking on interest rates. Mr. English believes that as the balance sheet shrinks, interest rates will go up, while President Lacker may hold a different view.


Passage number 168.
 What I had in mind was more the likelihood that, as the balance sheet shrinks, the additional control we get from the overnight RRP will become much less consequential— MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I understood your point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of understanding.


Passage number 169.
 MR. ENGLISH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't generate a response based on the information provided.


Passage number 170.
 —and, as I said, can be allowed to wither away if that was what the Committee— MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about what can be allowed to happen to something (which is not specified) if that is what the Committee decides.


Passage number 171.
  No, I understood your logic, and I thought that made perfect sense, although that long run, as President Lacker pointed out, is what one might call the very long run, and I’m anticipating a more— MR. POTTER.  So you’re thinking 2017.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges and agrees with the logic presented by the other person, but adds their own perspective of a longer time frame. The interruption by MR. POTTER does not introduce any disagreement or contention either.


Passage number 172.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  2017, 2018, 2019.  In any event, a nearer long run when we’re getting back to normalization of the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a future time frame for normalizing the federal funds rate.


Passage number 173.
 MR. ENGLISH. At that time, the Committee could choose to lower overnight RRP relative to IOER.  In some sense, it might be an experiment to see how much control you’re getting from IOER and how much control you lose by lowering the overnight RRP rate.  I know Simon probably has more thoughts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting the possibility of conducting an experiment to assess the level of control achieved through IOER and the potential impact of lowering the overnight RRP rate. Any additional thoughts from Simon are not mentioned to indicate disagreement.


Passage number 174.
 MR. POTTER. There’s control on the overnight rates and the effect on financial conditions.  When we get to 2017, 2018, the regulatory environment will be fixed.  Everyone will be in that new regulatory environment.  We have to look at what the best way of implementing monetary policy is in that regulatory environment, and that could look quite different from the way it looked in 2000.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the need to consider the best way of implementing monetary policy in a new regulatory environment.


Passage number 175.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Could I ask a follow-up, Chair. Bill English, you gave some sample language about the use of the facility.  I guess this is more a question for the Desk.  Suppose the Committee were to announce that in the long run we do not plan to be using the overnight reverse repo facility as part of the implementation of monetary policy.  Do you think that would cause significant disruptions in our ability to use it in the near term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is seeking clarification and opinions regarding the potential impact of a decision.


Passage number 176.
 MR. POTTER.  I would say that you might have to pay up 1 or 2 basis points to get the same interest rate control, but, no, if you said, you know, once the balance sheet gets down to $200 billion above currency, we’ll no longer use the overnight RRP—that is significantly far off. I mean, in the modal estimate, it’s six or seven years away.  In expected value, it might be an infinite amount away.  So they probably wouldn’t care about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and discussing the potential impact of certain actions in the future.


Passage number 177.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Right.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. President Evans is thanking Chair Yellen for her response.


Passage number 178.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Let me pick up where President Kocherlakota left off, because my first question—I have two—but he just asked one, which was would the ON RRP effectiveness be reduced if we announced explicitly that this is only going to be a temporary program and we have no intention of it being permanent.  So the answer is not really, not much difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple response to a question.


Passage number 179.
 MR. POTTER.  Not on the interest-rate control.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states that interest-rate control is not being discussed.


Passage number 180.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  All right.  So the second one is, I personally think it’s going to be tough to end this overnight RRP program.  I keep thinking about what the permanent consequences of it are.  I’d like to ask a question along those lines.  And I think we would benefit if we, sooner rather than later, had some of the scenario analysis.  But if we are thinking abouthow to understand the long-run implications of using the overnight RRP program with our monetary policy tools, how would the overnight RRP rate behave during a global risk event. Suppose there’s a global risk event. There’s a lot of risk aversion somewhere else in the world at a time when the United States is running the more normal funds rate, say 4 percent, and in fact, the economy is doing well and maybe we’re worried about inflation.  Following up on Governor Fischer’s question, which I interpreted as maybe we don’t need the funds rate, so maybe it’s the overnight rate that is a big policy indicator, and we’re running an aggregate cap with flight to quality.  We hit the cap.  The overnight rate is going to run down at a time when we’re posturing that we probably need tighter policy.  How are we thinking about doing monetary policy in a world configuration like that, in which signals are being confused.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of statements and questions about the potential implications and challenges of using the overnight RRP program in different scenarios.


Passage number 181.
 MR. POTTER.  So in this world, the aggregate cap is triggered.  The uniform price auction comes in, and then the rate that clears that auction goes down.  And the next week in the example, the take-up can go up in the overnight RRP and the cap resets to a large amount.  So you have that temporary effect there. If you had a more rigid cap, you would still have flight-to-quality flows into the United States, into other markets, that would be affecting those rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is merely explaining the potential effects of different scenarios.


Passage number 182.
 MR. EVANS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as the given text "MR. EVANS" does not provide enough information.


Passage number 183.
  Suppose the Committee had an attitude that we really didn’t want to increase beyond this cap very much; that, you know, we’re willing to use this, but we don’t— MR. POTTER.  So then what you’re going to see is if people really want to get into U.S. assets, they will tier through various U.S. assets at that point, which effectively will ease financial conditions in the United States, which you might not like.  With the overnight RRP, you have a little bit more control of that because you’re fixing that rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different ways to control and manage financial conditions in the United States, without indicating any disagreement or contradiction in their statements.


Passage number 184.
 MR. EVANS.  So in the past we would—you know, when we had a funds rate that we controlled, I mean, we could control it, and Treasury rates would start plummeting, like the   Asian financial crisis, and so depending on how things got priced off that, mortgage rates fell in that time period and in another time period they might not.  But all of a sudden this could lead to even more exuberance on the part of the economy at a time when you think that inflation is overheating.  If it’s a global event that’s taking place somewhere else more than in the United States, how are we going to implement a tighter policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting a scenario and discussing potential implications.


Passage number 185.
 I mean, if— MR. POTTER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 186.
  Well, an overnight RRP would let you do that more easily than other mechanisms we have, subject to how much take-up— MR. EVANS.  But the rate has gone down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between the speakers. They seem to be discussing the advantages and potential use of an overnight RRP without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 187.
 MR. POTTER.  No, no.  You’re not meddling with the rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement from Mr. Potter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 188.
 [Simultaneous conversation] MR. EVANS.  Well, that’s if you let the cap go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is suggesting that releasing the cap is optional, while the other person in the conversation might have a different opinion.


Passage number 189.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes, that’s if you let the cap go first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a conditional situation, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 190.
  If you don’t— MR. EVANS.  But if you have an attitude that you don’t really want to play around with that cap, I mean—so these are a lot of choices that have to be made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical situation about making choices related to a certain cap.


Passage number 191.
 MR. POTTER.  These are choices that the private sector is making and we’re moving along with them, or we can be more explicitly making those choices.  I don’t think it’s that different of a world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their perspective on the choices being made by the private sector and indicating that the world is not significantly different as a result.


Passage number 192.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  There’s nothing specific, though, about the behavior of the facility in that case.  It’s just behaving like a Treasury bill, right.  So that’s what a Treasury bill would do, and in fact, it’s intended to mimic the same dynamics that you’ve seen out of safe assets. There is a lot of demand.  The price goes up and the rates go down based on demand.  It wouldn’t be idiosyncratic to the facility.  It’s just like the behavior of short-term safe assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the behavior of a Treasury bill and how the facility is intended to mimic that behavior.


Passage number 193.
MR. EVANS. Right.  In the past, though, we could sort of keep the funds rate firm and point to the markets doing that.  We weren’t doing this.  Now our policy rate would be moving down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 194.
  So— MR. POTTER.  The policy rate is not moving down, I don’t think, in the way that we described it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or perception that the policy rate is not moving down in the described manner.


Passage number 195.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, the market clearing price is going down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply stating that the market clearing price is going down without any indication of contradiction or disagreement.


Passage number 196.
 MR. POTTER.  The market clearing price is going down at one of the auctions in which this happens, and then it depends how big that is.  That’ll show you the size of the flow, but I don’t think that’s your policy rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is made by one person, Mr. Potter, and there is no opposing view presented or discussed.


Passage number 197.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  One point we try to make clear in the memo is that this is really meant to be a circuit breaker, to give you some time to reassess what conditions in markets are and what the appropriate response is that is warranted at that point.  You could decide to lower the overnight RRP or you could decide to play with the caps.  You could decide to do whatever you decide to do.  The caps are not meant to entirely solve your problem right there.  They’re just supposed to give you some time, as a circuit breaker would work, to reassess conditions and decide what the appropriate response will be. CHAIR YELLEN.  I have a two-hander from Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Natalucci is explaining that the purpose of the caps is to give time for reassessment and to determine the appropriate response, and Chair Yellen does not express any disagreement.


Passage number 198.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes, I mean, in these circumstances you’d have to use the rate, and it would be the same today as well.  I don’t see that there’s any new principle that’s being introduced in this.  It’s only because the United States is so big that we think that we can be indifferent to what’s going on in the rest of the world.  When conditions change in the rest of the world, they accept that they’re a little country.  They adjust the rate as well as the quantities, and we’re getting to be relatively smaller than we used to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement and expressing their opinion on the matter.


Passage number 199.
   MR. KAMIN.  I would add that lately we haven’t seen too many instances in which the rest of the world has gone risk-off, in other words, flight to safety, and the U.S. financial system has remained risk-on.  Usually, when we see is spikes of risk aversion abroad, we see spikes of risk aversion in U.S. markets.  And so you could imagine some geopolitical event abroad spiking the usual increase in corporate credit spreads and declines in stock prices, wherein—although that would be a decision for you to make—some reduction in the fed funds rate might not be amiss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the lack of recent instances where the rest of the world has experienced "risk-off" while the U.S. financial system has remained "risk-on". The speaker also mentions the usual correlation between spikes of risk aversion abroad and in U.S. markets. The suggestion for a reduction in the fed funds rate is presented as a potential response to this situation, leaving the decision to be made by the listener.


Passage number 200.
 MR. POTTER.  I thought your scenario was one in which we didn’t want to reduce the policy rate.  Maybe I misunderstood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply expressing his understanding of the scenario and admitting that he may have misunderstood it.


Passage number 201.
 MR. EVANS.  Right—it was one in which we still thought that there could be inflationary pressures in the United States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 202.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 203.
  So they raise the overnight RRP rate— MR. EVANS.  No, but there’s a flight to quality.  So they’re busting through the cap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker says "So they raise the overnight RRP rate" while the other person disagrees and says "No, but there’s a flight to quality." This indicates a divergence of opinions.


Passage number 204.
 MR. POTTER.  But then the next week people know that the cap is going to go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that people will know that the cap is going to go up. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 205.
  So rates— MR. EVANS.  Oh, no.  That’s if you’re—okay.  So that’s a choice, which is you’re willing to play around with the cap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The phrase "Oh, no" is an exclamation expressing surprise or disbelief, rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 206.
 I’ve sort of listened to some of the commentary around the table, and I don’t think that there’s going to be the same type of— MR. POTTER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that the speaker has listened to some of the commentary and does not think there will be the same type of something (further context is needed to determine what that something is). There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 207.
  President Evans, the weekly average has gone up, which moves up—  [Simultaneous conversation] MR. ENGLISH. If I can clarify something at least—it’s either the cap or the rate, right. You either set a quantity or a price, and I think President Evans is suggesting that you don’t want to raise the quantity because you have concerns about the quantity.  Then you’re going to have to  let the price fall. And that’s a basic monetary policy issue.  Alternatively, if you want to raise the rate and you want to do whatever you think is right for monetary policy, you’re going to have to, at least over some period of time—maybe not immediately, as Fabio was saying—let the cap be much higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. English suggests that you can either set a quantity or a price, while President Evans has concerns about the quantity. This indicates a disagreement on the approach to monetary policy.


Passage number 208.
 MR. NATALUCCI. Also, it’s the aggregate that matters here.  So it depends what kind of mechanism you have set up.  If you adjust based on usage during the previous week and you reset quickly, then the cap moves itself up to accommodate demand, and the price impact is going to be lessened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the impact on price will be lessened if the mechanism is set up to adjust the cap based on usage and reset quickly.


Passage number 209.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  One thing, I mentioned is that this is intended to be an example in a more mature period.  So we have to decide what the size of our balance sheet is so that we have sufficient assets on our balance sheet so that we could expand it into, potentially, a very large cap if there was a tremendous flight to quality.  We’d have to be making some contingency decisions about how we’d want to be able to allow that cap to increase.  There are a lot of moving parts in this, and we’re familiar with the way we’ve thought about it when we have a funds rate as the instrument and the Treasury market responds as it does to market forces.  And I think it is incumbent upon us to just think through these issues in a careful, clear fashion sooner rather than later.  That’s really my only point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing the need to think through certain issues in a careful manner.


Passage number 210.
 MR. POTTER.  President Evans, I think we have been trying to think through them in a clear way. If the balance sheet gets smaller, then we’d have to think about whether you want to keep the overnight RRP.  There are many reasons separate from interest rate control that this is an operation the Federal Reserve might want to offer, reasons to do with the regulatory changes and other things, such as the provision of safe assets.  I think we’re focusing a lot on the normalization part and the negative parts to do with the disruptive surges. There are other   reasons why we might want to offer a facility like this.  On net, you might still want to do it.  It’s separate from the normalization issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing the possibility of keeping the overnight RRP as a facility offered by the Federal Reserve for reasons unrelated to interest rate control. They mention that there might be other reasons to offer such a facility, separate from the normalization issues.


Passage number 211.
 MR. EVANS.  Right.  So maybe I wasn’t clear enough.  I meant to be suggesting that this was a question for 5 to 10 years in the future when we’re in that type of setting and we needed to make some choices, not during the normalization period, during which I don’t have that many problems with this. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a conversation where Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen are discussing a future scenario and potential choices.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 212.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I thought this was a very interesting and useful conversation.  The part I took away as being especially important is what Fabio said, that the better terminology for these caps is circuit breakers.  It will just give the Committee time to think and react. I think we should be communicating about them if they are put in place, but the idea that they are hard-wired, I think, is wrong. I think the Committee will be making state-contingent decisions in a very short period of time to deal with a crisis. I would actually push back a little bit on what President Evans said about the need to think through these scenarios. I think it’s not humanly possible to think through all of the possible scenarios that will arise in those situations.  I think staff has done an excellent job of leading us through a wide range of important ones, but I think it’s very challenging for us to be thinking through this in the kind of calm we’re sitting in right now with VIX at whatever it is, 11½—to be thinking about what’s going to happen in these crisis scenarios.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. MR. Kocherlakota disagrees with President Evans' statement about the need to think through the scenarios. Kocherlakota argues that it is not humanly possible to think through all of the possible scenarios that will arise in those situations.


Passage number 213.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  One observation we make in the memo is that, if you want to ease market participants’ concerns about how it would work when the cap binds, how the auction would work, test it and make it bind occasionally.  And you could choose whatever framework you want to make them bind, whether quarter-end or some other period, so that people get used to the idea that the caps might bind once in a while or there could be an auction.  And it’s something that they can plan and they can think of like contingency planning, as opposed to a case in which it never binds, and then after three years it’s binding all the way.  Some signal is attached to what the Committee’s intentions are at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express disagreement or contention. It simply provides a suggestion for how to address market participants' concerns about how the cap would work in certain situations.


Passage number 214.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think that’s a helpful idea.  I think having it bind at quarter-end will be different from having it bind in the middle of a financial panic.  Bagehot’s description of the financial panic of 1866, which was like the end of the world, is very helpful in understanding that. I think it is just really hard to think through how things will work in those situations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the idea mentioned and is using an example to support their point.


Passage number 215.
 MR. POTTER.  So it’s supposed to bind in those situations to prevent disruptive changes in the funding flow, not to prevent people getting access to a safe asset when they really need that safe asset.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Potter is explaining the purpose of a binding agreement in certain situations, which is to prevent disruptive changes in funding flow and ensure people can access a safe asset when they need it.


Passage number 216.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I think we have come to the end of our list.  So my suggestion at this point is we take a break and have lunch, bring lunch back here, take a 45-minute break.  We’ll start up again around 1:00, and we’ll have our go-round. [Lunch break] CHAIR YELLEN.  I suggest that we now move into our go-round in which we’ll address the questions, and let’s start with Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion of the agenda and schedule for the meeting.


Passage number 217.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  May I ask a clarifying question.  Governor Tarullo, you used the word “large” a lot in your comments.  Can you give me a sense of what “large” is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and further explanation from Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 218.
 MR. TARULLO.  Well, part of the problem  is that I haven’t been able to get a very good sense of what people are contemplating for the size of the ON RRP program as an ongoing tool to play the kind of role in a corridor system that people had contemplated.  But I have to say that it seems to me that if it got very much larger than it already is, we would begin to run some of the risks that I identified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they don't have a clear understanding of what others are considering for the size of the ON RRP program, but they personally believe that if it were to become much larger, there would be some risks involved. This is simply the speaker's observation and opinion.


Passage number 219.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So $200 billion is okay.  I’m just trying to get a sense of where you start to get concerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and seeking clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
 MR. TARULLO.  It’s fairly easy to say that at current levels I don’t have a high level of concern.  Because of my skepticism about how well caps will hold once one is on some sort of trajectory upward, I think my concern may be as much in the way we project it and grow it initially as opposed to the size it actually ends up being.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses skepticism about the effectiveness of caps in controlling a certain trajectory. They also suggest that concern lies more in the projection and initial growth of the trajectory rather than its final size.


Passage number 221.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of polite exchanges and acknowledgments.


Passage number 222.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 223.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks, Madam Chair.  I have a follow-up question for President Williams.  Even in the fall of 2008, if we’d had this facility, couldn’t the Committee have thought about setting that rate negative.  There’s still an issue of being able to adjust the spread even though you’re going to be driving the level down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 224.
MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the provided passage without having access to the passage itself. Please provide the passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 225.
 WILLIAMS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "Williams" does not provide any information that indicates contention or disagreement. It is likely a standalone word without any context that can be evaluated for contention.


Passage number 226.
  That’s absolutely right, but again, I think that maybe the more interesting scenario is when you’re actually— MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I wasn’t disagreeing with that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "That’s absolutely right" suggests agreement between the speakers, and the response "I wasn’t disagreeing with that" confirms that there is no disagreement.


Passage number 227.
 MR. FISHER.  If I may, Madam Chair, I’d first like to welcome two old friends to the Committee, Stan Fischer and Lael Brainard, and I suggest that we garnish Governor Fischer’s substantial new wages to pay me back for all the times he used the treadmill at the Hotel Okura and charged it to my room over in the—  [Laughter]  And as to Governor Brainard, I had the pleasure of working with her—actually, under her tight control—for four years during the Clinton Administration.  So I want to welcome both of you. As I mentioned in the previous meeting, we are in the process of evolution.  I went back to Roosa, Volcker, Sternlight, Fisher, and now you, Simon Potter—obviously this discussion has informed this evolution enormously.  I found the previous meeting and this meeting, particularly the first parts of these meetings, to be enormously informative and very, very helpful, as well as the papers that were delivered, and I do want to give credit to everybody that prepared those papers and thank them for them.  But I do think we need to proceed deliberately, and I’m going to answer the questions with that in mind, bearing in mind again, as I mentioned earlier, that unlike in the old days, we in essence are only one-quarter or maybe one-fifth of the credit system, and we have to be mindful of that fact as we process these different questions. I was captivated by and am in full agreement with Governor Tarullo’s statement and also, shockingly, increasingly over time thinking more and more like President Rosengren.  But to start out with question 1, I do think we ought to use the IOER rate as the principal tool to affect interest rates.  I have a concern about the ON RRP program.  I want to talk about that in just a second, but I do think that basically the principal tool to affect interest rates is the IOER rate. With regard to the ON RRP program, I was affected by the discussion we had today about using it as a circuit breaker.  I think that makes eminent sense. I have concerns, however—and I hope the New York Desk will forgive me—I don’t mean this critically, but when, for example, we looked at exhibit 4, item number 22, and you mentioned your option was to add more counterparties of the current types, there’s a little bit of a “more the merrier” tune that comes through the memo that was written in terms of the review of the counterparty framework for overnight RRP operations, and I think we have to be careful here.  I think there ought to be a clear and principled dividing line between those with access to that facility and those without.  We could discuss what that dividing line should be.  My concern, Madam Chair, is that—and maybe this is what Governor Tarullo was saying—I don’t have a sense of final dimension here.  And I’m worried, given the fact that there are so many possible counterparties, and given the fact that we’re one-quarter or one-fifth of the credit system, that this could grow like Topsy and maybe grow slightly out of control.  We can’t be all things to all people, and we have to figure out what the strict limitations and definitions are.  I’m not saying we should not have RRP operations, but I personally struggle with what the order of dimension will be. I could make a case that, if we had a clear and principled dividing line, we would include depository institutions—our traditional Fed partners—the Federal Home Loan Banks, the housing GSEs, and government money market funds.  I could make a case for excluding the prime money market funds.  But I am a little bit worried that if we just keep adding more, we might create something that puts us in a place of being too much a part of the market, and I just wanted to voice that honestly and frankly to the Desk and to the rest of the folks at the table.  With regard to the issue of reinvestment of principal, I think President Rosengren makes a very good point.  I view that as a signaling device, and as much as we want to define forward guidance with specificity, as much as we try to define an exit principle with great specificity, as President Rosengren pointed out, we’ve had two goes at it before.  This is very much a matter of feel. The term “war-gaming” has been used quite a bit in today’s discussion.  The old way to conduct a war is, you didn’t shoot until you saw the whites of the eyes of your opponents.  With modern technology and modern modeling and so on, that’s been affected, but I mention that only because I would feel comfortable moving the base rate up once we see the whites of the eyes of a full recovery and meeting the dual mandate.  There may be a utility in using the reinvestment tool as we feel more confident, but don’t quite have the absolute level of confidence we would need to raise the base rate, depending on how the economy evolves, as President Rosengren said.  I don’t think it makes a huge difference in terms of affecting the size of the balance sheet, but it is a signaling device.  I would be in favor of keeping open the option of tapering back our repurchases—I think, President Rosengren, you used the phrase “symmetric reduction”—in order to send a signal to the market that we’re increasingly confident and it’s a bridge to raising the base rate.  Because the other thing I feel very strongly about, and I’ve discussed this with you offline, Madam Chair, is that when we decide to raise the base rate, I don’t want to do things in a sudden, old-fashioned way.  I’d like to do it by a quarter-point or maybe less than a quarter-point at a time.  So those are my feelings on the reinvestment of principal. As to the fourth point, I am in favor of continuing to publish something very much like the current funds rate, but maybe described as the overnight bank funding rate that would capture trades in the overnight Eurodollar market.  We had a little discussion there, clarified and then   confused by our great legal counsel, but I’m basically arguing the case that option 1 might be the easiest thing to do from the standpoint of the transactional commitments that exist in the marketplace.  And I think one of the benefits of that would be that limiting to domestic institutions and U.S. offices of foreign institutions could blunt the political criticism we might receive if there was a sense that we were providing a facility that’s unduly influenced by foreign borrowing costs. Those are my overall views, Madam Chair, and I realize they’re not all that specific, but we’re still feeling our way through this, and we’ll get more specific as we go through time.  Thank you very much. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of statements expressing the speaker's opinions and views on various topics.


Passage number 228.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Can I ask a clarifying question. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is simply asking for permission to ask a question, and the chairperson grants them permission.


Passage number 229.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So does that mean you want to have two federal funds rates, the old one and the new one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification on whether there will be two federal funds rates.


Passage number 230.
 MR. FISHER.  No.  I’m just saying that we would broaden the definition as suggested under option 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is clearly stating that they agree with the suggestion made in option 1 to broaden the definition. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 231.
 MR. POTTER.  Option 1 has us printing two rates, the fed funds classic and the overnight bank funding rate.  There’s a little bit of confusion about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions confusion about printing two rates, indicating that there is a disagreement or contention regarding which rate should be printed.


Passage number 232.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you for the clarification.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply expressing gratitude for the clarification he received.


Passage number 233.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I just wanted to make sure I understood what option 1 was.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange of clarification and gratitude.


Passage number 234.
  MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The discussion so far has been useful and illuminating.  There are many complexities and subtleties, and when presented with a number of tradeoffs in which the choice isn’t clear-cut, my approach is to pose some framing questions or tests as a way to sort through the options. My tests are, first, the probability of achieving control over short-term rates; second, where feasible, some flexibility to allow tactical adaptation as we learn; and, third, simplicity and clarity of communications.  When I go through the questions I will reorder them a little bit and bunch some together. On the question of the emphasis on the federal funds rate or administered rates, first, I expect we’re going to settle on using alternate rates for both monetary control and communications purposes, and I think it’s worth trying to preserve in that construct the use of the fed funds rate.  I favor beginning with a target range for the federal funds rate, since it is now familiar and probably more workable in the early stages.  So I favor the second of the two options presented in the staff memo.  I see it as giving us the best chance of exerting control over short-term rates.  If we go this way, a first order of business will be to construct statements that are as clear as possible, given all the moving parts.  I think the 3' verbiage in the illustrative time of liftoff statement would meet the test of clarity and simplicity. Now I’ll go to question 4, and that is the question about publishing an expanded fed funds rate definition.  I’m open to an expanded federal funds rate, including an expansion that incorporates Eurodollar transactions, along with nonbrokered fed funds transactions.  At the same time I think we should aim for the most durable definition possible of the target funds rate, and that leads me to thinking that we should include in our planning the scenario in which we return to a balance sheet of a size at which reserves are relatively scarce.  So I don’t know if   including Eurodollar transactions presents any issue in such a scenario, and this is the kind of question I think we can sort out in coming deliberations. On question 2, about circuit breakers—I thought the staff took a mostly neutral position in the presentation of options in the memos, but on this question I thought the staff went pretty far in pushing a cap on aggregate usage paired with a uniform-price auction mechanism.  I think this is a sensible place to start.  Although this is perhaps not a decisive consideration, this approach strikes me as simpler and less problematic to implement in terms of IT systems adjustments, as was pointed out in the memo.  Some of my other duties in the System make me attentive to such a statement.  I’d like to spend more time on this question of limits and circuit breakers leading up to the July decision point, and I hope we can ask follow-up questions of the staff during the period before the next meeting. The third question, which I’ll treat as the last one, is the reinvestment question—ceasing reinvestments or taking a graduated approach.  Ending reinvestments simultaneously or coincident with liftoff is clearest and conveys greater conviction, but I’m open to doing it after liftoff because I think this buys some time to observe how the first phase of tightening goes.  I think the reinvestment program can be ended or wound down based on tactical considerations after the transition represented by liftoff has been accomplished.  This, I think, is an area in which tactical flexibility is feasible. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a presentation of the speaker's thoughts and opinions.


Passage number 235.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, want to welcome our two new governors to our group.  It’s delightful to have you with us, and I’m looking forward to having you as colleagues.  But I also want to welcome my former colleague sitting next to me, Loretta.  I sat next to Sandy for nearly eight years, and Loretta was behind me and could only whisper and send me notes when I misbehaved.  And now she is close enough that she actually can kick me in the shin.  [Laughter]  I don’t know if that’s going to be a good thing or not, but I am delighted to welcome her as our colleague.  I’ve worked with her for many years, and I just want to say, “Congratulations and welcome.” I also want to start off by thanking the staff for all their helpful memos.  I think they were most extraordinary in many ways, and I was both impressed and greatly informed by them.  So I want to thank them for all that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and welcoming new colleagues.


Passage number 236.
 I don’t want to upset Governor Tarullo, but I’m afraid— MR. LACKER.  Nobody wants to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their fear of upsetting Governor Tarullo, but there is no conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 237.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Like others, I found the discussion from April and again today to be very helpful, and I remain open to considering this mix of tools as we go through normalization.  I am very comfortable with how the Chair has described a centrist approach in thinking about this. I do think, though, that we’ll need to be clearer about our intentions regarding the ultimate size of the balance sheet.  When I look at the draft that the staff included of possible revised policy normalization principles, the phrase that indicates we will hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively is in brackets, which suggests it’s an issue that we’re going to need to discuss.  My own view remains generally consistent with the 2011 principles that we affirmed just last year, which say that we intend to eventually hold no more securities than needed and reduce reserves to the smallest levels consistent with the efficient implementation of policy. One aspect of the normalization discussion and this use of overnight RRPs that makes me uncomfortable, as others have noted, is the substantially larger footprint we could have outside of the banking system, and I would align myself with Governor Tarullo’s views and counsel in this   regard.  Transacting directly with nonbank counterparties raises concerns about where we would draw the line, and while money market funds seem a natural boundary today, I could see over time that this pressure around fairness could grow and cause us to consider insurance companies, nonfinancial corporations, and pension funds as direct counterparties.  So, although as a practical matter the footprint may need to expand in the near term, I think steps to reduce the size of our balance sheet should remain a central tenet of our normalization strategy. To address the specific questions, in terms of the federal funds rate, returning the balance sheet to its pre-crisis levels relative to GDP with a small amount of excess reserves calls, I think, for maintaining a role for the federal funds rate throughout the normalization process.  At the same time, control of overnight rates will require, at least for a time, the use of an ON RRP facility. In terms of communications, I think continued reference to the federal funds rate is appropriate even though it may not serve as the primary tool during the early stages following liftoff.  As a practical matter, the ON RRP rate will need to serve that purpose given the size of our balance sheet and the use of IOER, but I would prefer to take an approach that maintains a wide spread in relation to the IOER rate. I also support the development of an expanded federal funds rate, though I would prefer that we move cautiously before adopting it as any kind of formal target of policy. Regarding circuit breakers, I am comfortable with aggregate caps, with a market-based pricing mechanism designed to become activated when the cap is reached.  However, again, I think a smaller balance sheet will naturally take us in this direction, and so, for that reason, I think we should remain focused on steps to reduce that balance sheet. And, finally, regarding reinvestment policy, it seems to me that the economy has not disappointed relative to our expectations last June when we reaffirmed the plan to cease reinvestments prior to liftoff.  If you remember, last June, the midpoint of our SEPs projected headline PCE inflation to be 1 percent in 2013 and the unemployment rate to be 7¼ percent.  Of course, unemployment fell more quickly, and inflation was above these projections, and given subsequent improvement in the unemployment rate and increased inflation, I don’t see a compelling reason to deviate from the plan of ceasing reinvestments prior to liftoff.  However, given that the primary dealer survey shows market expectations have shifted, we might consider redirecting maturing Treasury and MBS securities into shorter-dated Treasury securities.  That would allow us to maintain an elevated level of the balance sheet, but also provide for a more rapid runoff after liftoff. CHAIR YELLEN.  Could I just ask a question. Did you say that last June we had reiterated something about ceasing reinvestments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 238.
 MS. GEORGE.  We affirmed the broad principles around our 2011— CHAIR YELLEN.  But not the specifics around that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage indicates that there is disagreement or contention between Ms. George and Chair Yellen regarding the specifics around the affirmed broad principles.


Passage number 239.
  We said— MR. POTTER.  That’s right.  The tactics—in the press conference, it was clear that they were sort of suspended.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 240.
 MS. GEORGE.  And without distinguishing which were principles and which were tactics, the sequencing I saw as being the broad outlines of the principles that we had laid out in that exit strategy of 2011.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 241.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The Chairman, though, explicitly said something about agency MBS being—   CHAIR YELLEN.  I believe the Chairman said we would not sell MBS, and I think he said eventually we would have a smaller balance sheet, but that other aspects of it were up for reconsideration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states that the Chairman said something about agency MBS being up for reconsideration, but does not explicitly mention any disagreement or contention between individuals or parties.


Passage number 242.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Right.  If I remember correctly, Chairman Bernanke was very explicit that the sense of the Committee was not to sell the agency MBS. CHAIR YELLEN.  Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 243.
 MS. GEORGE.  But he didn’t take off the table that we would stop reinvestments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that someone did not remove the option of stopping reinvestments from consideration.


Passage number 244.
 MR. LACKER.  He didn’t disavow anything else in that statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone did not disavow anything else mentioned in a statement.


Passage number 245.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. You’re correct. [Simultaneous conversation] CHAIR YELLEN.  He didn’t avow it.  He said we need to reconsider many aspects of the exit principles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the other person is correct and then goes on to provide additional information.


Passage number 246.
  They were essentially no longer— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The way market participants read it is that these principles were sort of in suspension. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a statement followed by an agreement or affirmation by CHAIR YELLEN.


Passage number 247.
 MS. GEORGE.  Well, I believe we used the word “affirm” around broad principles in our statement, noting that many of the details might be reconsidered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. George, is expressing her belief that the word "affirm" was used in their statement to refer to broad principles, with the possibility of reconsidering certain details.


Passage number 248.
 MR. POTTER.  But it depends what a “detail” is, I guess. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen are having a conversation about a topic without any disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 249.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I trust the System Open Market Account manager.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses trust and confidence in the System Open Market Account manager. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 250.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER. With all due respect—There’s an important element of what are we asking them to do, how do we know they’re doing what we have asked them to do, and so on, so I think it is important to keep a specific range that we can monitor. On the question about circuit breakers, I don’t think circuit breakers on a fixed rate, full-allotment overnight RRP program are capable of addressing the financial-stability issues that some have raised in this context.  If investors want to flee a particular counterparty, or a particular class of counterparties, depriving them of the option of Federal Reserve Bank overnight RRP investments is hardly going to stop them.  They have short-term Treasury securities.  They have money market funds.  They’ve got bank deposits.  And that is just in the United States.  Indeed, most of the bank runs in 2008 were from one bank to another or from one   counterparty to another in the same asset class.  So I just don’t think this is worth troubling ourselves about. Now, on the other hand, I do think we should limit the size of the program, if we’re going down that road, and so I think we should impose an explicit quantitative limit on the size of the program, if only because of the finite size of our balance sheet.  I mean, if we go to full allotment, it would raise questions, what do we do if we get everybody showing up, and  running an auction like that described under option 2. In our earlier discussion, we had a really interesting exchange about interest rates.  Stopping out at the cap and then having an auction that drives interest rates down—this would be a mechanism to reduce the rate of return on ON RRPs in order to discourage people from shifting into them.  The obvious question is, why don’t we just reduce interest rates if we don’t want investors fleeing the assets they’re in.  That’s what we usually do in a crisis anyway.  So I’m not sure that’s germane here. On the question about reinvestment, I’m in President George’s camp of viewing elements of the exit strategy that we articulated in 2011 that have not been specifically refuted as standing as implicit commitments of ours. We indicated that we’d begin normalization by ending reinvestments and only later raising interest rates.  I think the macroeconomic implications of whether we start running off our portfolio several months before or several months after we start raising rates are likely to be negligible.  And I think that the staff’s analysis supported the idea that this is not terribly consequential.  But I do think it would erode our credibility to fail to follow through on the guidance we provided several years ago.  Forward guidance is really central to how we conduct policy these days.  I would think that at the margin we would always be reluctant to renege on past statements.  I think, as a general principle, there ought to besomething at stake.  And to me, the macroeconomic difference doesn’t seem to be worth it.  It just seems like there is little to gain there. On the question about an expanded federal funds rate, I came in having been left with the impression by some staff memo—I can’t remember which one—that there were enough legal differences between federal funds and Eurodollars to make it important to establish a new rate, but Governor Powell and Vice Chairman Dudley seemed persuasive about those issues, so I could easily be persuaded that we go with a single new rate. I have two final thoughts.  The staff has spent an enormous amount of time and effort on these memos, and I greatly appreciate all the time and energy they have devoted to this. We have spent a great deal of time on this as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreements or contentions. It is a discussion where different viewpoints are expressed and opinions are shared, but there is no specific argument or disagreement between individuals.


Passage number 251.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Not as much as they have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Not as much as they have" seems to suggest a comparison but does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 252.
 MR. LACKER.  First, there’s a sense in which the memos have been focused on a narrow perspective.  The issues we’re talking about—should the central bank offer moneylike liabilities to counterparties outside the banking industry—this goes back a couple of centuries to the debates about the banking school and the currency school, 100 percent reserves, narrow banking, and the like, and there is a broader debate here and a broader set of economic issues about how central banks should be structured that we haven’t really touched on. Second—and this is my last thought—I’m sure there are market participants who are dying to know about the operational mechanics of our exit.  But the closer I get to September, the more I think that the operational mechanics are not what most Americans want to know about our exit strategy.  I think they are interested in when it’s going to happen.  I think they will believe us when we say it depends.  But I think they are going to want to know what it depends on—is it the level of resource utilization. Is it the rate of change of resource utilization, or   consumption, or output, or the like.  How does inflation figure in.  Does inflation have to get high first, or are we going to nip incipient pressures in the bud. I worry that the time we are spending on the mechanics of our exit are detracting from useful work that we could and perhaps should be devoting to the macroeconomics of our exit.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of thoughts and perspectives from Mr. Lacker and his concerns about the broader debate surrounding central banks and the focus on operational mechanics of the exit strategy.


Passage number 253.
 MS. BRAINARD. Well, first of all, Madam Chair, it is delightful to be here, and I look forward to working with all of you.  I want to compliment the staff on their analysis, which I found very informative.  Unfortunately, I wasn’t able to have exposure to this very excellent analysis until yesterday [laughter], and in light of that, and of the very consequential nature of the questions on the table, I am going to reserve my comments until the next meeting. I’ll tip my hand a little bit, particularly in response to President Kocherlakota’s comments, and just say I would put a priority on demonstrating credibly to the markets that the Fed is going to be able to exercise effective control over financial conditions in the very unprecedented circumstances in which we find ourselves.  But I will reserve comment on the more detailed questions about exactly what that means until next time. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Okay.  We’ve come to the conclusion of our discussion on normalization, and I suggest we take a very short break.  Since it’s my job to crack the whip, why don’t I say 10 minutes—after having given you an incredibly generous lunch break.  [Laughter] [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks to everybody for an excellent discussion.  I think we did succeed in further narrowing the range of possibilities here, and we will try to come back to you with something that we think maybe represents where we might go in a consensus set of exit principles that we can discuss at our next meeting.  Let me also make clear that the Board meeting has now concluded, so we’re in an FOMC meeting.  And let me turn the floor over to Jeremy Rudd for the presentation on the economic situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. Brainard, expresses her admiration for the staff analysis and mentions her desire to reserve her comments for the next meeting. She also mentions her priority of demonstrating credibility to the markets. The passage concludes with Chair Yellen thanking everyone for the discussion and mentioning the transition from a Board meeting to an FOMC meeting.


Passage number 254.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have a question for Jeremy Rudd, and it’s about your underlying inflation forecast.  First, I really appreciate Deb Lindner’s memo—and not just because we were classmates at Wisconsin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions that the speaker appreciates Deb Lindner's memo, there is no mention of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 255.
 MR. RUDD.  That’s why we had her write the memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It simply states a reason for having someone write a memo.


Passage number 256.
 MR. LACKER.  That may work.  [Laughter]  It showed a lot about the ingredients of your thinking, and that’s really beneficial to us.  You have an exhibit 4, and, in panel 5, you’ve got your estimates of underlying inflation.  In her memo, it’s page 7—there’s a figure 4 that shows, I think, some of the same things.  You’ve got these statistical models of stochastic trends. You’ve got the Stock-Watson unobserved components−stochastic volatility model, the Cogley-Sargent model, and this time-varying parameter−stochastic volatility VAR.  In figure 4, it’s pretty clear that those estimates jump off from the fourth quarter of 2013.  They’re estimated on data through the fourth quarter of 2013, and they take off from there.  Some are just straight lines from there, and some gradually go up a little. Now, that’s the natural property of these things because, just as a matter of arithmetic, if you’re forecasting the future and you’ve got this unobserved trend, the last data observation is the most important one.  It’s at least as important as any other, and, in most cases, it’s more important than any other single observation.  So there’s an intuitive reason why the most recent data are more informative.  But I noticed that your forecast for core inflation for the second quarter of this year is higher.  I think that in the Tealbook, it was 1.8 percent.  But did you say that you’re now thinking 1.9 percent, having seen the CPI data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different models and their estimates of inflation.


Passage number 257.
 MR. RUDD.  For Q2 or Q3.  For Q2, it’s 1.9 percent for core PCE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a specific number without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 258.
 MR. LACKER.  All right—1.9 percent for Q2.  Now, I realize that your underlying inflation is a judgmental assessment.  I respect that.  You described it as informed by these statistical trend estimation mechanisms.  But if that forecast for Q2 comes true and you re-estimated those trends using data through Q2, wouldn’t they jump off from Q2’s core inflation rate of 1.9 percent.  They might trend down a little, but wouldn’t they all be higher than the estimates that you show in Deb Lindner’s memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 259.
 MR. RUDD.  In figure 4 in her memo, showing forecasts, although the forecasts are jumping off of the current inflation rate, some of the trends are going to be less susceptible to  influence by the last observation.  So in some sense, I think what you’re alluding to is that when you’ve got one-sided estimates at the end of your sample, you worry that those observations are more influential. I think that in most of these cases, the trends probably wouldn’t change all that much, and what will happen is that the inflation forecast will still converge to some of these trends from a different jumping-off point.  You can see it in the sense that, in Deb’s figure 4, we’re below the trends and we’re converging up to the trends.  It’s not that the trend has been pulled down unduly.  Rather, it’s that we’re converging up to these trends from a lower level.  And if we started from a higher level, we’d probably converge from a little bit higher.  In particular, the time-varying parameter−stochastic-volatility VAR is going to be least susceptible.  That trend looks extremely flat over the period that we think expectations were anchored—over the past 15 or so years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their view on the forecasts and trends, providing their interpretation of the data.


Passage number 260.
 MR. LACKER.  Is that in figure 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a simple question asking for clarification. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 261.
 MR. RUDD.  No, that’s not, because it’s hard to do forecasts off of that model.  It’s a complicated model to run.  So for a whole host of reasons, we didn’t do it.  But the trend estimates in panel 5 of the briefing, which was actually taken from the memo, are different from the forecasts that are shown in figure 4. The last point I’d make is that the two Phillips curve models that we show here aren’t going to change much at all.  Those are keyed off of survey measures of expectations, which haven’t changed. We basically forecast those as a random walk process.  So the survey measures are constant at their current level, which has been pretty much the same for a fairly long time— plus or minus one-tenth for the Michigan measure.  Those estimates aren’t really going to  change, given the current observation, and we’d probably get a pretty similar forecast a few years out—that is, what we got from 2013:Q4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing explanations and clarifications but not expressing disagreement with any other person or viewpoint.


Passage number 262.
 MR. LACKER. Well, let me just make sure I understand. These statistical models, holding aside the Phillips curve models, would all go up, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and understanding.


Passage number 263.
 MR. RUDD.  Models 3 through 5, say, in the panel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Not enough information is provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 264.
 MR. LACKER.  If you re-estimated them through Q2, all of the estimates would go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a hypothetical scenario where all the estimates would go up if they were re-estimated through Q2.


Passage number 265.
 MR. RUDD.  Well, the trend estimates may or may not change very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a possibility that the trend estimates may or may not change significantly. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 266.
 MR. LACKER.  I didn’t ask how much.  I asked whether they’d go up.  None of them would go down.  They’d all go up, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange where Mr. Lacker is clarifying his question and restating his point. The other person does not argue or disagree with him.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 267.
 MR. RUDD.  The time-varying parameter−stochastic-volatility VAR might not change much at all.  The Stock-Watson model is very close to an accelerationist model but with a very long lag right now, so that might actually pick up a tiny bit.  For the Cogley-Sargent model, I don’t know, because that model allows for possibly sluggish deviations from its trend, and it could interpret a surprise as being a relatively transitory movement away from the trend.  The trend itself might be better anchored than in, say, the Stock-Watson model.  So I think, in order of precedence, Stock-Watson is going to react the most, and the time-varying parameter/stochastic-volatility VAR is probably going to react the least.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that the Stock-Watson model will react the most, while the time-varying parameter/stochastic-volatility VAR will react the least. This suggests a difference in opinion or interpretation of the models' reactions.


Passage number 268.
 MR. LACKER.  The Stock-Watson model’s trend looks like a random walk.  The forecast is right where it is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating a fact about the Stock-Watson model's trend and forecast. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 269.
 MR. RUDD.  The forecast is basically a random walk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact about the forecast, without expressing any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 270.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  So it would go up the whole way, right.  It would go up to 1.9 percent or close to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or possibility.


Passage number 271.
  MR. RUDD.  No, if the trend doesn’t change, what will happen is, it will reverse a lot of the current shock in the next quarter and then keep going at the trend.  The idea is that the Stock-Watson model sees most shocks nowadays to inflation as basically transitory shocks that are reversed very quickly, and so it would probably pass through some of that and reverse some of the shock pretty quickly.  The trend itself is not necessarily going to move very much.  That’s more like a very long moving average.  The current data will only have a tiny influence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply explains a prediction based on the Stock-Watson model.


Passage number 272.
 MR. LACKER.  No, I understand.  I understand.  So the question is your underlying inflation in the memo sounded like it was based on this stuff, and I’m wondering—you were sort of silent on whether your forecast for second-quarter inflation, which takes on board some high-frequency observations that aren’t a part of the analysis in Deb’s memo, incorporates that or not.  If Q2 comes true, will you revise up your underlying inflation forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is seeking clarification on whether the forecast for second-quarter inflation incorporates high-frequency observations.


Passage number 273.
 MR. RUDD.  Probably not, because we think that, ultimately, what drives that object is inflation expectations, and we don’t have evidence that longer-run inflation expectations have moved.  We think that changes in underlying inflation as we’ve defined it are basically driven by changes in longer-term inflation expectations.  And those, we think, are still pretty anchored.  So in our staff forecast, we would probably keep our 1¾ percent assumption and then see what the dynamics of the model implied for our response to the Q2 data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is sharing their perspective on inflation expectations based on available evidence and their own forecast model.


Passage number 274.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges gratitude towards someone named Mr. Lacker.


Passage number 275.
 MR. WILCOX.  I would interject only the rather obvious observation that, relative to the estimates that are provided by our suite of models, we put our judgmental assumption pretty close to the upper end of the envelope of those estimates.  So I think if those estimates moved up, we wouldn’t feel much compulsion to adjust up our judgmental assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that their judgmental assumption is already close to the upper end of the estimates provided by their models. They also mention that if the estimates were to increase, they wouldn't feel the need to adjust their judgmental assumption further.


Passage number 276.
 MR. RUDD.  Let me reiterate as well that figure 4 in the memo is not the trends.  It’s the forecasts that are generated by models that have these underlying trends.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply restating and clarifying the information presented in the memo.


Passage number 277.
 MR. LACKER.  Right. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between Mr. Lacker and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 278.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes, just to follow up on this, though, one thing about inflation expectations is, you’re using survey measures.  Why not use TIPS-based measures. I’d prefer five-year TIPS.  I think we can control inflation over a period of five years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply asking a question and expressing his preference for using TIPS-based measures for inflation expectations. There is no indication of opposition or argument from anyone else.


Passage number 279.
 MR. RUDD.  In the memo, there was a discussion about that, and, in the previous memo that we sent to the Committee in January about the staff’s inflation framework, we talked about that as well.  More broadly, some of the forecasts that you get of inflation from financial-market-based measures—I think Deb cites one in her note—also imply that inflation is not coming back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions previous discussions and forecasts about inflation.


Passage number 280.
 MR. BULLARD.  But they shift around more than—especially the Michigan survey, which has been misforecasting inflation for more than two decades.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is stating a fact about the Michigan survey consistently misforecasting inflation for over two decades. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 281.
 MR. RUDD.  I think the problem we have with the financial-market-based measures is that, first of all, they don’t extend through long samples.  So it’s hard to build a model around them.  And, second, weird things can happen in Treasury markets that make those estimates move in ways that we probably wouldn’t attribute to inflation expectations.  When people actually back out inflation expectations from those measures, they often do so with reference to things like the Blue Chip or the SPF or some other measure of inflation expectations to tie down the component of movements in the financial-market-based measures that they think is really and truly reflecting inflation expectations as opposed to other things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents two limitations of financial-market-based measures but does not involve conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 282.
 MR. BULLARD. Well, I’d prefer you switch.  The Michigan measure has been off for decades.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. BULLARD states his preference for switching, and he mentions that the Michigan measure has been off for decades, which could imply that it is not working effectively. However, there is no direct argument or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 283.
  MR. RUDD.  The model does pretty well, though—the model based on the Michigan survey has actually done pretty well at forecasting inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the model based on the Michigan survey has been accurate in predicting inflation.


Passage number 284.
 MR. WILCOX.  President Bullard, it’s true that the level of inflation expectations has been off.  If you forgive a constant, that survey measure, the median expectation of longer-term inflation expectations, actually does quite well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the level of inflation expectations has been inaccurate, but a particular survey measure of longer-term inflation expectations has performed well.


Passage number 285.
 MR. BULLARD.  I didn’t get that out of the memo.  I don’t have the memo in front of me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard simply states that he didn't get a specific information from the memo and that he doesn't have it in front of him.


Passage number 286.
 MR. RUDD.  That’s actually the adjustment that’s being made to get the point estimate that’s backed out of the models.  The same is true for the SPF.  One of the points that Deb makes in the memo is that the SPF, to the extent that it did well over recent history—the last decade or so—it was lucky.  It was because, basically, they didn’t see the oil price shock coming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage describes the process of adjusting the point estimate backed out of the models and mentions the view expressed in Deb's memo about the SPF being lucky in its accuracy over the last decade. However, there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement between the parties mentioned.


Passage number 287.
 MR. BULLARD. Okay.  Here’s TIPS from your memo—2.5 percent over the period up to 2004:Q1.  Actual headline CPI was 2.5 percent.  In 2009:Q1, TIPS said 2.7 percent.  Actual headline was 2.6 percent.  So it was right on the button both times.  It did get it wrong for 2014:Q1, but that includes the period of the crisis.  Headline CPI came in at 2.1 percent.  TIPS said 2.7 percent.  It’s been superaccurate.  It’s CPI based.  So you’d have to adjust to get to PCE. I have another question on this.  On the decomposition of core PCE inflation, what always gets me—and we’ve talked about this picture before—is the huge fraction of the forecast that’s coming from this underlying inflation measure is really practically the entire picture here. So how should I interpret that.  If inflation comes in at 1.9 percent and we’ve got underlying inflation at 1.75 percent, then should I say that we’ve got above-normal or above-trend inflation, or am I supposed to compare it with 2 percent, which is the Committee’s official target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating facts and asking for clarification or interpretation.


Passage number 288.
 MR. RUDD.  In our judgment, you should be comparing it with 1.75 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states "In our judgment, you should be comparing it with 1.75 percent." without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 289.
  We think 1¾ percent is the underlying rate of inflation, and that this is a relatively well-anchored level around which other influences like slack or supply shocks can— MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So 2 percent is above.  I’m interpreting this to be, 1.75 percent is the new 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their belief that the underlying rate of inflation is 1.75 percent and that they interpret this new rate to be equivalent to the previous rate of 2 percent.


Passage number 290.
 MR. RUDD.  Well, as we pointed out in the Tealbook extension, if you want to get to 2 percent, you’ll have to do something.  Right now, we think that if you want to get inflation to 2 percent, you’re going to have to push the unemployment rate below the natural rate for an extended period and prove to people that you’re serious about 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a viewpoint about the necessary steps to achieve a desired outcome.


Passage number 291.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, are you saying that the credibility of the Committee is eroding, and that, therefore, the world now expects only 1¾ percent from the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The quote is a question asking for clarification or confirmation of a statement, not expressing disagreement.


Passage number 292.
 MR. RUDD.  It’s not clear they ever expected 2 percent.  It’s not clear they really even know what the PCE is, for one thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about whether the other party expected 2 percent and whether they have knowledge of what PCE is.


Passage number 293.
  [Laughter] MR. BULLARD.  I suppose a lot of things aren’t clear, but you do have inflation expectations here and, for instance, the SPF is right at 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 294.
 MR. RUDD.  Well, but the SPF is saying 2 percent over the next 10 years.  If you back out what the SPF is saying for the 5-year-forward period—in other words, 5 years down the line, what it says about the next 5 years—it’s above 2 percent, and it has been ever since the 10-year average has been 2 percent.  It’s never been 2 percent for 5 years, 5 years forward, which suggests to me that you have to be a little careful about interpreting even the SPF’s 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing disagreement or skepticism about the interpretation of the SPF's prediction of 2 percent growth over the next 10 years. They argue that if you look at the SPF's predictions for the next 5 years, it has consistently been higher than 2 percent, which suggests that one should be cautious in accepting the SPF's 2 percent forecast.


Passage number 295.
 MR. BULLARD. Okay.  But I’d be willing to interpret that over a 5-year period. I think we can control inflation over a 5-year period.  If the market doesn’t expect 2 percent, then maybe we’re not doing our job.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing his willingness to interpret the given information over a 5-year period and suggesting that controlling inflation over that timeframe is possible. He also admits that if the market does not expect a 2 percent rate of inflation, then it might indicate a failure on their part.


Passage number 296.
  MR. WILCOX.  Indeed, I think that’s a version of what we’re saying:  The proposition underlying this memo is that it could perfectly well be the case that inflation expectations are anchored.  It doesn’t need to be the case that they’re anchored at 2 percent.  And, as best we can tell, the burden of evidence leans slightly toward inflation expectations being anchored at a modestly lower rate of inflation.  That’s the statement that’s being made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their belief and presenting evidence to support it.


Passage number 297.
 MR. FISCHER.  David, where were inflation expectations before 2008.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for a factual answer.


Passage number 298.
 MR. RUDD.  Inflation expectations have basically been pretty stable since the late 1990s.  There’s only one small hint that things were coming a bit unglued around 2008 in the Michigan survey, when, at the apotheosis of the run-up in oil prices and other commodity prices right before the crash, there was a hint of evidence that maybe long-run expectations were starting to react slightly.  I should point out that these are longer-term expectations.  Short-term expectations from the Michigan survey go all over the place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments. It provides factual information about inflation expectations and mentions a small hint of evidence that long-run expectations were starting to react slightly in 2008. There is no disagreement or contention presented in the passage.


Passage number 299.
 MR. FISCHER.  When there was the economic collapse, nothing happened to expected inflation at the beginning of 2009.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about the lack of change in expected inflation during the economic collapse in early 2009.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 300.
 MR. WILCOX.  Not to speak of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The words "Not to speak of" indicate that the speaker is about to mention something that may potentially contradict or challenge what has been previously discussed. This suggests that there is a disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 301.
 MR. RUDD.  That’s the remarkable thing.  One of the things that led us to conclude— and I was a very grudging convert to this view—that inflation expectations were extremely well anchored was that, in the face of the 2007 to 2009 recession—one of the deepest recessions we’d ever seen, with massive swings in commodity prices and a big increase in unemployment that we think was cyclical—longer-term inflation expectations didn’t budge.  There’s almost no movement in the survey measures that we look at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a viewpoint and providing evidence to support it without any conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 302.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Again, the survey-based measures don’t change.  If you look at the TIPS-based measures, they were very tight before the crisis—2-year; 5-year; 5-year, 5-year   forward; and 10-year.  They’re all very tight around 2 percent or maybe even a little higher.  They blew out during the crisis.  People didn’t know what to think.  They did come back together after the crisis, but there was a lot of variance—a lot more than there was before the crisis—and that’s never really gone away completely.  So I would say the character of inflation expectations was damaged somewhat during the crisis, although, generally speaking, it was pretty stable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an analysis of the survey-based and TIPS-based measures of inflation expectations.


Passage number 303.
 MR. RUDD.  I’d have to worry about things that happened in financial markets in that period, too, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It mentions that Mr. Rudd would have to worry about things that happened in financial markets during a certain period, implying a general concern rather than a dispute.


Passage number 304.
 MR. BULLARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 305.
  Only during the period of the crisis itself, but then you’re talking about a couple of years afterward when— MR. RUDD.  Well, we had the European crisis leading to flight-to-safety flows and things that were affecting Treasury markets in ways that, again, make me worried about using these TIPS-based measures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Both speakers are expressing different opinions on the use of TIPS-based measures and their reliability during the period of crisis and the years following it.


Passage number 306.
 MR. BULLARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having additional information or the context in which the passage is presented.


Passage number 307.
  These are normal shocks— MR. POTTER.  The inflation compensation measures have been remarkably stable for the past year or so.  The last time they moved a lot was probably September 2012, in reaction to things that we did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that inflation compensation measures have been stable for the past year or so and mentions a previous instance where they moved in reaction to certain actions.


Passage number 308.
  MR. RUDD.  And we’re definitely not arguing about that.  As David said, we still think inflation expectations are anchored.  That’s a fundamental cornerstone of our forecast.  The question is, what are they anchored to.  That’s where it gets a lot harder for us to back out something specific.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they are not arguing about inflation expectations being anchored. Instead, they mention that the difficulty lies in determining what those expectations are anchored to.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 309.
 MR. BULLARD.  I think it’s a fundamental issue, because what you’re really saying is that, to get inflation to 2 percent, you’ve got to shift longer-term expectations somehow.  And Idon’t think the Committee is even thinking about that.  The discussions I’ve heard, anyway, have not really talked in those terms since September 2012, when we undertook QE3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is disagreement or contention in the passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing his belief that the Committee is not considering the fundamental issue of shifting longer-term expectations to achieve a 2 percent inflation target. He disagrees with the discussions he has heard since September 2012.


Passage number 310.
 MR. WILCOX.  I’m not convinced that there’s a real issue here, but, to have recourse to facts, I direct you to page 26 in the data sheets in the back of the Tealbook volume, which shows both inflation compensation from TIPS, down in the lower panel, and the survey-based measures, in the upper-left panel.  What is shown there is that the 5- to 10-year-ahead inflation compensation measure has been running consistently above 2 percent.  That’s for CPI.  And, consistent with Jeremy’s description, the median 5- to 10-year Michigan survey, in the upper-left panel, has just been remarkably flat, I would say, since the late 1990s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox is simply providing data and observations without any indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 311.
 MR. LACKER.  Madam Chair.  Inflation itself has averaged closer to 2 percent than 1¾ percent over the past 20 years, as I recall.  Is that your understanding of the PCE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and asking for confirmation.


Passage number 312.
 MR. RUDD.  Headline inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions "headline inflation" without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 313.
 MR. LACKER.  An average of 2 percent.  We’ve got all of these expectations measures, which you say indicate strong anchoring of inflation.  Actual inflation has averaged 2 percent, and you think it’s anchored to 1¾ percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no obvious contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, simply presents information about inflation averages and expectations measures. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 314.
 MR. RUDD.  Well, for two reasons.  One is, when we put those measures into our models of core inflation, we don’t find that they’re saying the underlying inflation rate is 2 percent.  One of the things Deb talked about at some length in the memo is that, if you think the SPF got it right, it looked as though the SPF was just wrong about the oil shocks.  They were behind the curve, as were futures markets, and so they didn’t really anticipate shocks that occurred that boosted actual inflation. When we put these measures into our core inflation models—that’s what the first two models in panel 5 of exhibit 4 are doing—they spit out levels of inflation—underlying inflation, as we’ve called it—that are lower than 2 percent.  In other  words, looking at the historical behavior of inflation, the historical behavior of supply shocks, the historical behavior of slack, and the historical behavior of these survey-based expectations measures, the survey-based measures have been consistent with inflation rates, in the absence of those other factors, that aren’t equal to 2 percent—even the SPF, whose reported level over the next 10 years is given as 2 percent. You have to be careful, too, about evaluating that forecast.  That’s a 10-year-ahead forecast.  We’re not really evaluating how well that did 10 years later.  We’re just saying, over some longish average period, what happened, but we haven’t really done the exercise of saying we’ve looked to evaluate how well the SPF did 10 years ahead.  What we did do is to back out what they’re saying between years 5 and 10, and there you don’t get 2 percent, which I think is interesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that the survey-based measures of inflation are lower than 2 percent, while the SPF forecasted a level of 2 percent. This is a disagreement about the expected level of inflation.


Passage number 315.
 MR. LACKER.  This thing about the oil shock last decade has always confused me.  Let’s say it’s unexpected, the SPF is consistent with 1.75 percent, and it’s just been chance that we’ve gotten 2 percent instead of 1.75 percent—it’s this extra factor, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification, rather than stating a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 316.
 MR. RUDD.  1.75 percent for core.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a numerical percentage.


Passage number 317.
 MR. LACKER.  Right. CHAIR YELLEN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The two individuals are having a conversation and there is no indication of any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 318.
  Let’s— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY  Move on.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The laughter from the audience indicates a light-hearted moment rather than a serious argument or disagreement.


Passage number 319.
  President Kocherlakota, did you have a— MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I had a two-hander.  I’d like to ask a quick question.  As a result of the Lindner memo, the staff has lowered its measure of underlying inflation from 1.9 percent to 1.75 percent.  I haven’t been keeping track of where it was before it was 1.9 percent.  If I go back, say, two years, what was the staff’s measure of underlying inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and information regarding the staff's measure of underlying inflation.


Passage number 320.
  MR. RUDD.  We changed it around the time of the last big revision of the NIPA statistics because it looked as though average inflation over history, because of the new methodologies the BEA was using, was down one-tenth.  I can’t remember the exact date though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the change was made, but the exact date is not remembered.


Passage number 321.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  So it was at that time.  It went from 2 percent down to 1.9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the change in percentage from 2 percent to 1.9 percent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 322.
 MR. RUDD.  Then in January, I believe, when we sent the inflation memo forward to the FOMC, Mr. Wilcox briefed, and I remember there was a kerfuffle about 1.9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The mention of a "kerfuffle" suggests that there was disagreement or contention regarding the 1.9 percent mentioned.


Passage number 323.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Right.  Okay.  Thank you very much. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams, did you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It consists of a simple exchange between Mr. Kocherlakota and Chair Yellen, where Mr. Kocherlakota thanks Chair Yellen and President Williams is asked if he has a question.


Passage number 324.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot provide an answer as the passage is missing.


Passage number 325.
 WILLIAMS.  I did.  And, unbelievably, it’s on the same subject.  [Laughter]  We’ve actually thought about and discussed this at length, so I really do want to just very briefly comment on this and not on the issues that have already been mentioned.  But this is a serious issue.  Your forecast now tells us that we have to create a substantial and sustained overshoot of maximum employment to reach our 2 percent goal.  So it is consequential.  This is a bigger issue than just one-tenth in a forecast.  When you say it’s—let me just finish—in the actual anchoring of inflation, you’ve got to get that anchor back up.  We should think seriously about how we interpret this in terms of what it means for policy over the next few years. I actually thought Deb’s memo was really interesting.  I thought it was a great box on a contrarian risk to the forecast.  But I wasn’t convinced at all by the analysis—the points have already been made.  Inflation over the past two years has been almost exactly 2.0 percent.  SPF is exactly at 2 percent for the 10-year ahead.  And if you really get into thinking about what’s a good measure of underlying inflation, why not look at the Dallas Fed trimmed mean.  That’s 2 percent over the past 15 years.  So there’s something about how you’re starting from core andbuilding up—I’ve been in the Fed a long time, and I’ve done these inflation models myself, and I know this is not the only way to think about this.  If you go from the top down, the FOMC has committed to a 2 percent inflation objective.  It’s not serendipity that we’ve gotten 2 percent.  You could think of this as our goal.  The fact that inflation ex food and energy runs under 2 percent is a reflection that, given the relative price movements over the past 15 years, you had to have core be below 2 percent. Again, I look at the Dallas Fed trimmed mean and some other measures of underlying inflation, and they’re not nearly that different.  So I guess my challenge to you is to maybe distance yourself a little bit from just building up core and then saying relative prices must be flat over the next 10 years.  Think about this analysis from a different perspective.  Again, I thought the analysis was good and interesting.  It’s important, and I’m not quibbling over the facts in the models.  But it is consequential, and it’s worthy of further discussion and analysis—but not necessarily right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and interpretations of the issue without directly refuting or challenging anyone else's opinions.


Passage number 326.
  [Laughter] MR. WILCOX. We recognize that it’s consequential.  We discussed all of those factors that you raise.  I would be the first to acknowledge that the confidence intervals encompass a wide range of possibilities.  But, in the end, after having argued about this at great length ourselves as well, we came to the judgment that the weight of the evidence was a little more in favor of a resting point for inflation that was a bit south of 2.  I wouldn’t want to put up a harder front than that, but I felt that we owed it to you to reflect that judgment on our part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are different possibilities and that they had discussed and debated the topic extensively, but ultimately came to a judgment together.


Passage number 327.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 328.
 WILLIAMS.  Well, the good news is, I finally heard Jeremy Rudd, after some 15 years, say that he has embraced the anchoring of inflation expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker mentions that they finally heard someone express their agreement with the anchoring of inflation expectations after a long period of time. This statement does not suggest any disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 329.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Just not at 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement.


Passage number 330.
  [Laughter]   MR. WILCOX.  President Williams, consider the following thought experiment.  As to the sanctity of 2 percent, if the Committee were, for whatever reason, to announce that your objective had been revised from 2 to 2½ percent, one could introspect about what the effects of that would be.  A consequence and implication, a corollary of the perspective that we’ve taken, is that you might not get all of the way from, say, 2 to 2½ just on the basis of words alone, and that you might need to back that up with some actual behavior.  That’s the basic proposition.  Now, if one takes the view that, through communication alone, you could get wage and price setters, who are actual flesh-and-blood people engaged in the acts of setting wages and prices, to conform their behavior to your announcement without running the economy a little hotter for a period of time, then you could take the view that 2 percent itself is a natural attractor.  That informs my judgment that it’s entirely plausible for inflation expectations right now to be anchored at something that’s just a little different from what the Committee has in mind as its objective. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  We will probably continue to discuss this, I think it’s fair to say.  Why don’t we begin our go-round.  We’re probably going to break around 6:00 for dinner, so if we could get through a reasonable amount of this, it would be good.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a discussion and exploration of different viewpoints and possibilities, but there is no clear contention or disagreement between the speakers. They are simply considering different scenarios and perspectives.


Passage number 331.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Even with the assumed strong second quarter, real GDP growth for the first half of this year has been quite disappointing. My December submission expected growth for 2014 of 3.1 percent, and I now expect 2014 real GDP growth of only 2.1 percent. While some of this can be attributed to temporary factors, from bad weather to unusual trade and inventory patterns, I am concerned that the economy is proving to be weaker than I had previously expected.  Several sectors of the economy explain my reduced optimism for this year.  For example, over the past six months, I have lowered my forecast for residential investment andbusiness fixed investment, even for the second half of this year.  The scars from the recession appear to be causing more cautious behavior by both households and firms than I expected earlier, so I am now expecting less of a rebound in residential investment and business investment than we would normally forecast as the economy improves. I also remain concerned about slack in the labor market.  I assume that some of the labor market slack reflected in the unusually wide spread been the U-6 and U-3 measures of unemployment implies that the U-3 unemployment rate will be less responsive than normal to the pickup in growth I anticipate for the remainder of this recovery.  Specifically, I have in mind that, as we approach full employment, more of the workers marginally attached to the labor force and working part time for economic reasons will return to the labor market as full-time employees.  In fact, I was a bit surprised that the unemployment rate remained at 6.3 percent in May and did not reverse some of the decline from the previous employment report. The labor force participation rate continues to be a bit of a puzzle.  Throughout the recession and the early recovery, even the more pessimistic projections for labor force participation have missed on the upside.  Like the staff, I have lowered my estimate of the steady-state labor force participation rate because of the continued one-sided misses, but I will need more evidence about the reason for this decline, particularly in the 25-to-34 age group, before I lower my steady-state estimate to reflect the more recent developments in participation. My suspicion that some of the recent drop in the rate of labor force participation is overstated provides another reason why I do not expect to see the unemployment rate fall quite as quickly as we might otherwise have expected as real GDP grows faster than potential. Given my forecast of slower 2014 growth and a less responsive unemployment rate, I now expect to reach my estimate of full employment of 5¼ percent in early 2017.  Given the low   inflation rate and my view that we should not be lifting off interest rates until full employment is clearly in our forecast horizon, I expect the liftoff to occur in early 2016. I end my comments with a little trepidation about discussing the Deb Lindner model.  One interpretation of her data analysis is that inflation expectations have gradually slipped down because of unemployment systematically being above our target, and inflation being well below our target, since the Great Recession began.  Thus, contrary to the concerns of some about unanchored expectations on the upside, our systematic and persistent inflation outcomes below our 2 percent target are in danger of unanchoring expectations on the downside.  This would occur at a time when Europe is increasingly concerned about deflation and Japan has been forced to take drastic actions to increase inflation expectations. Should the results in this memo continue to be borne out by the data, the result is that we will need to overshoot full employment in order to bring long-run expectations back to target and then to drive realized inflation to our 2 percent inflation target.  This has implications for the timing of our liftoff of short-term rates that we will be discussing tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of one person expressing their concerns and revising their forecasts based on new information and analysis. There is no debate or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 332.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Economic activity in the Third District continues to grow at or slightly above its longer-term trend, and many business contacts remain optimistic.  Bank lending has shown improvement, particularly C&I loans.  Auto sales for the month of May were termed “phenomenal” by one of our contacts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the economic activity and optimism in the Third District, as well as improvements in bank lending and auto sales.


Passage number 333.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Anecdotal reports in the Fifth Federal Reserve District are very similar to what we heard prior to the last meeting.  They indicate continued moderate growth overall, but with significant variations across the region.  One director observed that the conditions seem to depend on whether you are above or below what people call the “sweet tea” line.  This is an imaginary boundary that runs east to west through southern Virginia, somewhat south of Richmond and north of the North Carolina border.  If you order iced tea and you aren’t asked what kind you’d like, above the line, the default is unsweetened tea, and, below the line, the default is sweetened.  [Laughter]  Similarly, if you’re asking about economic conditions above the sweet-tea line, reports tend to be quite discouraging, while prospects are much brighter below the line.  However, I’m not sure this says anything about the causal effects of drinking sweet tea.  Weakness north of the sweet-tea line seems to reflect the fallout of declining federal spending on the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area and the Hampton Roads metropolitan area, and the depressed coal market in West Virginia.  The Carolinas, though, are seeing a pickup in loan growth and investment.  A banker in South Carolina, for example, says they’ve seen increased business optimism this year and organic loan growth reflecting expansion-related investments.  In North Carolina, bankers said that credit quality is getting better and better. Turning to the national outlook, some changes in the Tealbook brought the staff’s forecast closer to my own projection.  The estimate of the long-run growth rate of real GDP has been lowered ¼ percentage point, the forecast for growth in residential investment this year has been reduced 3½ percentage points, and the forecast for this year’s growth in nonresidential structures has been cut 3¼ percentage points. My own projection has not materially changed since our March submission, aside from lowering GDP growth and raising inflation in the first half as a result of the significant new data we’ve received since then.  There were times over the intermeeting period when I was tempted to make a meaningful upward revision to my projection for consumer spending, which would have pushed my GDP projection higher.  The temptation was based on the fact that consumption came in pretty strong for the fourth quarter.  It seemed on track for similar gains earlier this year despite the weather.  But recent reports on health-care expenditures and retail sales paint a different picture, making the strength in fourth-quarter consumption growth look more temporary   than permanent.  So I don’t see household spending picking up much momentum in the second half of this year. I’m also less optimistic than the Tealbook about the outlook for residential investment. Five years on from the recession, that experience seems to have left a large segment of the population much less inclined to make major housing investments than in previous expansions.  Like President Plosser, I view this as less a cyclical phenomenon than a fairly fundamental structural shift in the housing market.  People are bound to place greater weight now on the possibility of large declines in home values and in their ability to repay.  On top of that, tightening credit availability reduces financing opportunities and provides another good reason for caution in household financial planning.  In addition, there remains a substantial overhang of homes associated with foreclosures or seriously delinquent mortgages.  So my sense is that the sluggishness in single-family starts will be fairly persistent, and that a burst of residential investment—like that in the Tealbook, albeit delayed—is relatively unlikely. The other difference I’d highlight concerns inflation.  I really appreciated, as I said, the latest memo providing details of the staff’s thinking on inflation forecasts, but I’m not completely convinced that it will take so long for inflation to get to 2 percent.  President Williams raised some excellent points about interpreting relative price changes and the approach of relying so heavily on core for underlying inflation trends. I think the firmer inflation readings we’ve seen of late raise for me the serious likelihood that inflation has bottomed out in this current little dip we’ve seen, and that we’re going to see reasonable progress toward our 2 percent target this year.  And, while the staff rightly argues against putting excessive weight on the most recent observations, surely the optimal weight is greater than zero.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 334.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’ll start with feedback from Sixth District contacts.  We call them “inter-Lockhart-ors.”  [Laughter] In general, business activity appears to have strengthened after the first quarter, and sentiment remains positive.  Consumer spending continues to rise.  Spending on autos and the associated production activity of plants in the Southeast are particularly robust.  A director on the manufacturing side believes auto assembly plants are operating at or near capacity. Most of our banker contacts say that loan demand is improving.  Pipelines are pretty strong.  But demand varies considerably by loan category and geography.  Commercial lending is picking up across the District.  Line utilization is rising, but mortgage refinance is low, and purchase mortgage application activity is mixed. The relative weakness of the housing sector is getting a lot of attention, so we focused some effort on that sector with District contacts. The sales activity picture is mixed across the Sixth District, with Miami, for example, enjoying a boom driven by foreign investors; with southern Louisiana also being very active, underpinned by energy-sector employment; and with home sales and construction in an otherwise solidly performing Tennessee being characterized as soft. We heard many explanations for the softening real estate sales, but no common theme emerged.  High student debt burdens of young people and a bifurcated employment market recovery are thought to be weighing on household formation and first-time buyer demand.  Constrained access to financing for lot development and rising construction costs were cited as restraints on residential construction.  I think the sector bears close monitoring.  Neither our contacts nor our sector specialists in the Atlanta Fed put forth a firm opinion on whether the softness is temporary or likely persistent. Now let me comment on my outlook and how it compares with the Tealbook.  It appears quite likely that the final reading on first-quarter GDP growth will show a large negative number.  This pushed me in the recent forecast submission to lower once again my 2014 growth estimate.  If the first quarter comes in as the current tracking estimates indicate, I don’t expect that the economy will post much more than a 2 percent increase for the year. I’ll insert the good news here.  My very public, at least in this body, over–under bet made last summer with David Wilcox on the growth rate of the next year and a half is really looking good.  I took the “under” on 3 percent.  I have not yet pre-spent my winnings, but I may spend the dollar soon to help the economy just a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a report on various economic indicators and the author's personal outlook.


Passage number 335.
 MR. WILCOX.  You have a dollar in escrow, President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about President Lockhart having a dollar in escrow.


Passage number 336.
  [Laughter] MR. LOCKHART.  Like so many others, I’m viewing the first quarter as a transitory event heavily influenced by weather.  So I’m focused more on the run rate evidenced in this and subsequent quarters than on the full-year 2014 arithmetic.  I continue to believe that the current run rate is a bit above 3 percent.  In that view, my forecast aligns with the Tealbook.  Our soundings in the District this cycle yielded a couple of points that are supporting evidence.  We surveyed a panel of 562 small businesses on their credit conditions.  The survey showed notable improvement compared with recent earlier surveys in the proportion of firms reporting that they’re receiving all or most of the financing they have requested.  Large corporate contacts hinted at a thawing of their attitude toward capital investment or expansion.  I don’t want to make too much of these indicators, but they’re consistent with what I interpret to be, on net, a positive stream of data suggesting a run rate of 3 percent or better.  The question of the amount of remaining labor market slack will be central, obviously, to our policy deliberations in coming meetings as we think about the timing of liftoff.  My team in Atlanta is increasingly concentrating our attention on the PTER group.  We’re coming to the view that the improving but still-elevated level of involuntary part-time employment is very important to the question of how much slack remains and helps explain the weakness of wage pressures.  Evidence of wage growth and, more generally, continuing firming of prices, with measures approaching our 2 percent target, will be pivotal in my thinking about when to start tightening. Next I’ll comment on the risk to my outlook.  I’m treating the risks to all of the elements in the SEP submission as basically in balance. The five alternative scenarios in the Tealbook are a good representation of the range of possibilities.  I took special note of the Tealbook’s downward adjustment to potential and the staff’s inclusion of the “No Room to Grow” scenario. At the moment, I’m agnostic on the debate around potential, but I think evidence provided by wage and price data will be telling in solving the puzzle. Finally, I’d like to draw the attention of Nellie, Andreas, and the Committee to one particular financial-stability risk in the very near term that should literally be on our screens.  In June 1974, 40 years ago, the Bundesbank allowed Bankhaus Herstatt to fail.  On their last day of operation, the bank’s Frankfurt office did not complete clearing payment instructions because, according to lore, the staff left early to watch a World Cup match.  [Laughter]  The world financial system almost cratered, but West Germany did win the World Cup.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker's views, observations, and comments on various indicators and risks related to the economy.


Passage number 337.
 MR. FISCHER.  What is the inflation rate, sir, that your people expect to be 2 percent. Is that PCE, or is that CPI.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks for clarification on whether the expected inflation rate of 2 percent refers to PCE or CPI. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 338.
 MR. EVANS.  Our target is for 2 percent.  The one that was alluded to before was total PCE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a target of 2 percent and mentions a previously alluded topic.


Passage number 339.
 MR. FISCHER.  But in your models.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only provides the statement of Mr. Fischer without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 340.
 MR. EVANS. Oh, in our models.  Yes, we do have the PCE target.  Well, we have both.  We have the CPI target and PCE, and we try to take account of the wedge between them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they have both the CPI target and the PCE target and they try to account for the difference between them.


Passage number 341.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes.  The average gap is ¼ percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward statement of a fact.


Passage number 342.
 MR. RUDD.  I think it’s wider.  It’s more like 35 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rudd is expressing his own opinion or perspective about something.


Passage number 343.
  MR. EVANS.  Yes, 35 basis points was quoted to me the last time I asked that a couple of meetings ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker simply states the information that was given to them without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 344.
 MR. RUDD.  It sounds right to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rudd, simply states that something sounds right to him, indicating agreement or approval. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 345.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes.  I defer to the inflation experts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is simply deferring to the inflation experts, indicating agreement or acceptance of their expertise.


Passage number 346.
 MR. FISCHER.  Without having tried this out even on my close family, I would guess that if you asked people what the inflation rate is, it isn’t the PCE—I’m saying that, if we were to ask the average American, “Do you think inflation will be 2 percent.” the person would say, “Yes.”  And if we asked, “Do you think inflation means the PCE.” the person would say, “The what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Fischer about his belief regarding people's understanding of inflation and the PCE.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 347.
” MR. EVANS.  Well, the CPI is closer to 2½ percent.  They’re going to get it wrong.  That means that we have a big job in front of us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, believes that the CPI (Consumer Price Index) is closer to 2½ percent, while implying that others will "get it wrong." This suggests a difference of opinion or contention about the accuracy of the CPI.


Passage number 348.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes.  Well, I don’t know what 2 percent—anyway, we’ll come back to this.  But I think the Fed is using a rate that people don’t relate to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker doesn't know or understand a specific percentage but intends to revisit the topic later. Then, they express their opinion that the Federal Reserve is using a rate that people generally don't understand or connect with. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 349.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker explicitly states that they agree with the statement, indicating unity or shared understanding rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 350.
 MR. EVANS.  Are we likely to change that.  We’ve ratified our longer-run policy strategy statement for monetary policy the past several years, and that’s what the number is. CHAIR YELLEN.  Indeed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is asking if there are any potential changes to the policy strategy statement, and Chair Yellen simply acknowledges his statement.


Passage number 351.
 MR. FISHER.  Stan, there actually is a trimmed-mean PCE.  It’s a common family.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or information about the existence of a trimmed-mean PCE.


Passage number 352.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  Yes, that’s what they say in Texas. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a conversation between two individuals and there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 353.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes—thank you, Madam Chair.  I’d like to spend my time talking about two related topics.  The first is the memo on inflation by Deb Lindner, which I   thought was excellent and was very informative.  The second topic is a couple of lessons from Japan based on conversations that my policy adviser, Kei-Mu Yi, and I had with BOJ monetary policy committee members in the intermeeting period. I thought the Lindner memo was important in two key respects.  The first has to do with how it feeds into the staff outlook for inflation.  The staff outlook, under their best estimate for the Committee’s monetary policy reaction function, is now that inflation will return to 2 percent sometime in the early part of the next decade.  Now, this forecast is not intrinsically inconsistent with our current longer-run goals statement.  That statement makes no reference to any kind of time horizons.  As a result, in principle, inflation could run persistently above or below 2 percent for 5, 10, or 20 years without violating our longer-run goals statement. I will make a remark on something that President Fisher alluded to.  He expressed discomfort with the idea of exceeding maximum employment and having overutilization of resources in order to move up inflation expectations, if I’m interpreting correctly. If that’s a general sentiment on the Committee, then I think it’s going to be very hard for us to say that long-run inflation is under our control, as we do in our longer-run goals statement.  The longer-run goals statement says that we have control over long-run inflation and we decided to make that 2 percent.  But if we’re uncomfortable exceeding maximum employment in order to move up inflation expectations, as the staff indicated is necessary to move inflation back up to 2 percent, then we can’t say that we’re going to hit 2 percent, because once inflation drifts down, we’re not willing to move it back up.  That’s something we should talk about if that’s a general sentiment among Committee members. Okay, so the first thing is that the impact of the staff outlook is very important.  The second important aspect of the Lindner memo is its implication for the behavior of inflationexpectations.  As you’ll hear, I took on board the estimates out of the econometrics models—the Cogley-Sargent and Stock-Watson models—more than I did the imputations from the SPF and Michigan surveys.  The estimate of the trend component in the Cogley-Sargent and Stock-Watson models of inflation is currently less than 1½ percent. What is this telling us. This means that if people in the economy form their expectations like econometricians, inflation expectations would now be materially below target.  And this, I’m worrying, would, in and of itself, put further downward pressure on inflation and inflation expectations. The point on which I would differ, I guess, somewhat from the thinking of the staff is, when I look at survey evidence and financial market prices, I don’t see any evidence of that downward drift in inflation expectations at this time.  My interpretation is that, unlike the models that are learning only from the data, the public is listening to us talk—to the FOMC’s communications—and we continue to be credible.  Even though I agree with Governor Fischer that they don’t necessarily understand what inflation rate we’re talking about, they trust us that we’re going to hit 2 percent on the inflation rate.  We continue to be credible in that the public continues to trust our willingness and ability to deliver 2 percent inflation.  I don’t think we should just count on this happy situation continuing indefinitely.  The staff forecast does not have inflation returning to 2 percent for more than five years.  I think it’s in the early part of the 2020s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions on various topics, but there is no direct disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 354.
 MR. WILCOX.  It’s late in this decade.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the current time period.


Passage number 355.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m sorry—late in this decade.  There will be a point at which the accumulation of hard data will trump our forecast.  Personally, I counsel against waiting for hard evidence of the unmooring of inflation expectations to spring into action on the inflation front. I’m sure that everyone around this table remembers that high inflation expectations had really become part of the American culture and psyche in the 1970s.  My recent visit to Japan reminded me that the same can be true of low inflation expectations.  Deputy Governor Nakaso of the Bank of Japan told me a story that powerfully illustrates this point.  In the past year, the Bank of Japan gave its first nominal base pay increase since 1995.  Now, I don’t want the Governors to get any ideas from this, but this was the first nominal base pay increase since 1995. There’s a special Japanese word for “base pay increase” that the deputy governor and the bank used to describe its compensation action.  Of course, I don’t know that word.  [Laughter]  But what’s more interesting is that one of Deputy Governor Nakaso’s assistants, a young woman, came to him and asked, “What does this word mean.  What are you going to do to my pay. I’ve never heard this word before.”  In some sense, like Paul Volcker’s challenge, the BOJ’s challenge is not just an economic one.  It’s really a cultural one, to change the backdrop of inflation expectations in their minds. How has the Bank of Japan tried to address this challenge.  As you know, the bank is pursuing an aggressive purchase program.  More important, in my view, they’ve announced that the program will return inflation to 2 percent by about late 2015, and they’ve committed to take additional steps if they’re falling short of that goal. As the charts Beth Anne talked about indicate, Japanese inflation has risen sharply in the past year from zero to around 1¼ percent.  Would it have risen so rapidly if the Bank of Japan had stuck to their January 2013 announcement that it viewed an inflation rate of 2 percent over the longer run as being consistent with their mission.  There’s no way to know for sure, but I believe that the 2015 deadline has been critical in their being able to make as much progress as they have on inflation.  For me, the lesson from this is, there is value in making our monetary policy objectives have a deadline—in management-speak, having them be time bounded.  I’ll talk about the implications of that for monetary policy in the next go-round.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 356.
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Tenth District economy continued to expand moderately since our last meeting.  District employment picked up slightly in April, and four of our seven District states now have unemployment rates at or below their pre-recession average.  Service and manufacturing firms both reported stronger activity in May and remained optimistic about employment growth in coming months.  And, finally, drilling activity in the Tenth District increased further in May, driven by a rise in crude oil activity. Turning to the national economy, my outlook for real growth is little changed compared with our last meeting.  Like others, I expect a rebound in the second quarter from the decline we saw in the first quarter, and I have lowered the path of the unemployment rate through the end of 2015. Looking ahead, I continue to expect above-trend growth of around 3 percent over the forecast horizon.  The fundamental factors supporting this forecast are fiscal drag ending, labor markets improving, household wealth continuing to rise, and financing conditions remaining supportive of growth.  The most recent NFIB survey is consistent with my view of a gradual pickup in economic activity and inflation.  Small business optimism and the percentage of small businesses expecting higher real sales in the next six months are at or tied with their post-recession highs. In terms of labor markets, the composite labor market indicators constructed by my staff continue to show improvement in the level of labor market activity, and the momentum indicator of this survey is higher than at any time in the past two decades.  Key factors contributing to the high level of momentum are the growth in aggregate weekly hours and improvement in the University of Michigan’s measure of expected job availability.  I’m also encouraged by the increase in the job-finding rate for the short-term unemployed—which increased from 22 percent   in January to more than 29 percent in May, a post-recession high—as well as the significant increase in job openings in the latest JOLTS data. In terms of housing, one of my District contacts, who is a CEO of a large national realty firm, characterized the housing market as settling into a more traditional and sustainable growth pattern, even as she described a confluence of factors that currently affect the market.  Low inventories, tight lending standards, elevated levels of student loan debt for first-time homebuyers, and a lack of new building were cited as weighing on housing.  And she noted that much of the available inventory is of rather low quality.  The declining share of first-time homebuyers in the market was also cited as a substantial headwind.  Similar to President Plosser’s observation, work by my staff has highlighted that the aging population will continue to substantially shift demand from single-family units toward multifamily. In the face of these issues, of course, housing remains extremely affordable by historic measures.  I noted that the National Association of Realtors’ Housing Affordability Index shows that housing is still substantially more affordable today than at any time between 1970 and 2009.  In addition, I’m encouraged that the employment-to-population ratio for 16-to-24 year-olds has been picking up over the past 12 months, which may help foster demand for first-time buyers.  So, even as housing continues to face headwinds, I expect historic affordability and an improving labor market to lead to continued, though modest, gains over the forecast horizon. Finally, turning to inflation, recent data releases show that the deceleration we saw last year has ended, and we’re seeing a broad-based increase in inflation over the past few months.  The NFIB survey also reports that the percentage of respondents planning on raising their average selling prices and worker compensation is at or near its post-recession high.  This gives   me greater confidence in my outlook for a gradual increase in inflation to reach 2 percent by the end of 2015.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a summary of economic conditions and outlook provided by Ms. George, and there is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 357.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 358.
 MR. TARULLO.  Let’s say 9:00 tonight.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  That’s good—9:00 tonight.  We could get it all done.  I think 9:00 a.m. should work, and we’ll finish up the economic go-round then.  I’m hoping that the policy round is not too complex.  Across the way, dinner will be served. [Meeting recessed] June 18 Session CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  Let’s resume our economic round.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a lighthearted conversation about scheduling and dinner plans.


Passage number 359.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A few quick points, some of which are connected.  First, I subscribe to the general view many of you have already stated that the significantly increased momentum of this quarter will continue through the year, though probably at a somewhat reduced pace.  In addition to the factors that have been cited by others yesterday afternoon, it is probably worth noting that cap-ex almost has to jump some this year, because there have been so many delayed investments needed to replace worn-out equipment.  And from what I’ve read, some of that is just going to come due. Second, though—and this is a variation on the theme sounded by Vice Chairman Dudley and Governor Fischer over the past few minutes—I find it a little hard to totally ignore Q1.  I   mean, subject to data revisions that would make things look a little less bad, the early part of the year wasn’t a hiccup; it was more like coughing up blood.  And since weather is, at most, an incomplete explanation, as Governor Fischer just pointed out, particularly for the housing slowdown, I think there is probably at least a little bit of reason for lingering concern as to whether there is some weakness underlying the recent bounceback.  I think that’s connected to some of the things Bill was saying. Third, there certainly continues to be improvement in the labor market.  Everybody cited it.  By definition, that means there must be less slack than there was six months ago.  But I think it’s still hard to say just how much less slack there is.  Some of the incoming data, I think, can still be read in ways that are consistent with both of the narratives we have been hearing over the past year or two or three—for example, the recent uptick in job openings has been read by some as an indication of latent mismatch problems now manifesting themselves, suggesting that there is less slack.  But I think you could also read it as an indication that employers are finally moving from talking about more hiring toward taking the steps to actually do more hiring.  What will ensue will be more hiring and perhaps increased employment of the long-term unemployed, whose rates of job-taking, as Stan just noted, have picked up some. Similarly, I think the relative impact of the long-term unemployed on wages and inflation is going to continue to be hard to pin down.  I will confess to not having read the new paper coauthored by President Williams.  I didn’t download it and read it last night, President Williams—I’m sorry—but I will.  As he was describing it yesterday, I was reminded again that until this recession and recovery, short-term and long-term unemployment in the United States had essentially moved together for more than half a century.  In some sense, the current situation is really the only observation we have to make judgments about the implications of long-term   unemployment in a context in which it isn’t changing, more or less, in lockstep with short-term unemployment.  That is why I think we are going to continue to see good, thoughtful work on both sides of this issue for a while to come, and why, as I said a couple of meetings ago, I think we are just going to have to be pragmatic in making decisions. Fourth, we have definitely seen some early signs of a pickup in wage increases, though not so much in total compensation.  I believe we should all hope that this trend continues and, indeed, accelerates, since PCE increases are going to be hard to sustain at the levels that are anticipated in the Tealbook in the absence of significant increases in household income.  I mean, we are not going to be able to continue to rely on wealth effects from the asset appreciation over the past year or so and the declining saving rates that we have seen over the past year or so. Fifth, and finally, unless there is something ominous lurking in the Q1 experience, it does seem as though the biggest downside risks to the U.S. economy are foreign in origin, both economic and geopolitical.  On the economic side, people have mentioned—Beth Anne did yesterday—the case of possible Chinese inability to maintain growth above 7 percent.  I have also begun to wonder some about Japan, which seems to be slipping from the relatively favorable trajectory that it established last year.  On the geopolitical front—this is all pretty obvious—there has been some reduction in risk of broad-based fallout from Ukraine, but it’s still material.  As a couple of people noted yesterday, Iraq has returned to the fore as a source of potentially substantial instability with rising effects of the type we have already seen on oil markets and beyond.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is sharing their thoughts and observations on various topics, but there is no argument or disagreement present.


Passage number 360.
 Presidents Fisher, Plosser, Lacker, Lockhart, and Fisher—I said “President Fisher” twice, I apologize— MR. TARULLO.  This is going to happen a lot.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN. —commented on their impressions from surveys with their contacts describing sentiment using terms like “positive,” “favorable,” and “solid.”  But several of you did comment on housing, noting that it does remain very soft.  Tealbook expects a considerable pickup, but I did note comments by Vice Chairman Dudley and Presidents George, Lacker, Lockhart, and Plosser suggesting that for a host of different reasons relating to demographics, student debt, credit constraints, and supply constraints in producing housing, that the softness we have seen may be with us for quite a substantial time. Although most of you appear to have incorporated in your forecasts an expectation that growth will pick up to an above-trend rate in the remainder of this year and next, a few of you— Presidents Rosengren and Lockhart, Governor Tarullo, Presidents Bullard and Evans, Governor   Fischer, and Vice Chairman Dudley—did sound some notes of caution here.  The forecast of a return to moderate growth does remain just that. It’s a forecast and not yet a reality.  President Bullard noted that the quarters with negative growth are quite rare and may not, in fact, prove to be transitory, and several of you noted—President Rosengren, I think, noted this particularly— that incoming data have caused you to lower your forecast, becoming a bit more pessimistic.  I personally agree that given how frequently we’ve been burned in the past, some degree of caution is in order until forecast turns into reality. Turning to inflation, many of you noted the higher recent readings we’ve seen on core CPI and PCE inflation, including yesterday’s CPI reading, and interpret that as providing positive evidence that inflation is in fact moving back up toward our goal, which is a condition we have established to continue to reduce the pace of asset purchases. A few of you, and I would include here Presidents Plosser, Fisher, Lacker, and Bullard, expressed concerns that, absent a sufficient removal of policy accommodation, inflation could well rise above the Committee’s target.  Presidents Fisher and Plosser and Governor Fischer cautioned us to remember that with declining unemployment, wages may rise, pushing up inflation and leaving us behind the curve, with a few of you noting that the risks could entail a rise in inflation expectations, although Governor Fischer cautioned us that there is huge uncertainty around this forecast.  But I think it’s fair to say that no one at this table would like to experience a repeat of the 1970s. President Williams noted that in recent work with Glenn Rudebusch he found evidence confirming the view of Kruger, Gordon, and others that inflation is more sensitive to short-term than to long-term unemployment.  Frankly, I’ve personally been skeptical of this finding based, in part, on work by Board staff, and as Governor Tarullo mentioned, the increase we have seen inlong-term unemployment is pretty recent and historically unique, and it could have other interpretations, such as downward nominal wage rigidity. But I think we need to recognize that it is a possibility, and, if so, inflation could rise to mandate-consistent levels well before our full employment goal is attained.  The conclusion that President Williams drew isn’t that the Committee is behind the curve, but rather that the Committee may need to permit a temporary overshoot of our 2 percent inflation target to counter hysteresis, and I do think this is an important policy issue and it’s one that will merit further discussion in the days ahead. In contrast to the concerns that were expressed that inflation may rise above our target, Presidents Rosengren, Evans, and Kocherlakota focused on exactly the opposite concern, that inflation may persist below our target for a prolonged time unless we permit unemployment to overshoot our estimate of its natural rate, along the lines contemplated in Tealbook and justified by the analysis described in the Lindner memo.  Under these circumstances, President Kocherlakota emphasized the risk that inflation expectations could drift down over time, as in Japan, and low inflation expectations could potentially become endemic and hard to change. On balance, you continue to expect that, under our current policy path, inflation will gradually move up toward our 2 percent objective.  Some of you mentioned, as in Tealbook, that this could require a period of running the economy above potential. Briefly, on risks to the outlook, most of you mentioned that they seemed reasonably balanced, and the main risks I heard pertained first of all to global developments, such as slowing growth and financial-stability risks in China and the possibility that tensions in the Middle East could lead to a sharp increase in energy prices.Also importantly, Vice Chairman Dudley and Governor Fischer and particularly Governor Powell spoke to the issue of the low level of volatility and the trends we’re seeing in financial markets, some compression in credit spreads, reach for yield, and other risks to financial stability, and I absolutely agree that these are trends that are disturbing and, at a minimum, warrant monitoring.  Let me come back to this in a second. Just adding a couple of brief comments of my own.  With respect to the outlook, I haven’t changed my baseline forecast very much at all since our previous meeting, and I, too, see the broad range of incoming evidence as suggesting continued improvement in the labor market.  That said, I agree with those who see the decline in U-3 as overstating that degree of improvement, and I particularly see a portion of the decline in the participation rate as reflecting discouragement. With respect to the prospects for growth and continued improvement in the labor market, I frankly found recent data to be quite perplexing.  At this stage, it looks like we’ll see a pretty alarming decline in first-quarter GDP, and although most of the decline is due to large negative contributions from net exports and inventories, private domestic final purchases also seem to have slowed, and the most recent retail sales numbers haven’t been all that encouraging either.  As Governor Fischer mentioned, it’s not clear we should take heart from the fact that net exports and inventories declined either.  There are real crosscurrents here. As I mentioned, I am also worried by the continued failure of real wages to grow in line with productivity.  I agree with Tealbook that as the labor market tightens this trend will probably change, but I do see it as a downside risk to the outlook for consumer spending.  Without denying the substantial progress the economy has made toward returning to maximum   employment, these observations underscore to me the importance of remaining cautious as we approach the question of the appropriate timing for removing accommodation. And I would also just emphasize that I, too, am concerned about developments in financial markets and the signs we may be seeing of complacency in some segments.  In addition to continued general vigilance in monitoring, I think applying appropriate supervisory and regulatory measures is in order.  I also do think it’s important to lean against any tendency that develops in markets to view the FOMC as making any unconditional policy promises. In other words, I think we should emphasize—and this is something that Governor Fischer emphasized, and Governor Powell and Vice Chairman Dudley also commented on—that policy is truly data-dependent.  If, based on our reading of labor market conditions, inflation, and financial conditions, the outlook were to strengthen materially, policy accommodation would be removed sooner than markets might anticipate, and market participants need to be aware of this possibility. However, I do agree with Vice Chairman Dudley that I would be reluctant to purposely say something to try to jolt expectations and to purposely raise volatility, given that we’re against the zero lower bound, and that’s a delicate balance, but I think it’s one we need to navigate. Let me stop there, and I think we’re ready to turn to our policy round.  Let me turn to Bill next for his briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is a summary of various comments made by different individuals at a meeting.


Passage number 361.
 MR. ENGLISH.5  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will be referring to the handout labeled “Material for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives” that was distributed this morning.  As shown in the top panels of your first exhibit, despite the unexpectedly large decline in economic activity in the first quarter, the staff, the primary dealers, and your SEP contributions all still point to fairly steady declines in the unemployment rate and a gradual return of inflation toward your 2 percent goal as the economy 5 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). grows at a somewhat faster-than-potential rate over the next couple of years.  With the economy still on track, you may see the outlook for policy as little changed.   The primary dealer economists would agree.  As shown in the middle-left panel, the median dealer projection for the path of asset purchases is unchanged from April.  All of the dealers are virtually certain that the Committee will reduce the pace of purchases another $10 billion at this meeting and that purchases will continue to move down in measured steps.  Most dealers expect that you will cut purchases from $15 billion to zero at the October meeting, though a handful see a $10 billion reduction at that meeting, with Treasury purchases continuing at a pace of $5 billion through December.  As Simon noted yesterday, there is still a fair amount of disagreement about when you will choose to end reinvestments of principal payments on SOMA holdings, but, of the dealers who answered the question, most now see the end of reinvestments coming after liftoff.  Moving to the right, this timing contributes importantly to the later decline in the dealers’ expectation for the size of the SOMA portfolio than in the staff forecast, which assumes that reinvestments end at the time of the first increase in the funds rate. The bottom panels examine expectations for the path of the federal funds rate.  As shown on the left, the median dealer and buy-side survey respondents made only modest changes to their outlooks for the funds rate since the April survey and continue to expect a gradual rise in short-term interest rates starting next summer.  As shown to the right, the dealer survey, the staff forecast, and your SEP contributions all show a reduction in the longer-run normal level of the federal funds rate over recent months.   Turning to the alternatives for this meeting, with the medium-term economic outlook little changed, you may want to make only small changes to the statement, as in alternative B on page 6. The first paragraph of alternative B updates the Committee’s summary of recent economic developments, noting that economic activity “has rebounded in recent months,” without explicit reference to the transitory decline in output during the first quarter.  It is a bit more upbeat than the April statement regarding labor market developments, describing them as generally showing “further improvement” and noting that, although the unemployment rate is lower, it remains elevated.  Household spending is described as rising moderately, and the statement notes a resumption in growth of business fixed investment.  The only other changes to the statement are a reduction in the pace of asset purchases noted in paragraph 3.  Market expectations appear to be fairly well aligned with a statement like alternative B, and consequently it would be unlikely to generate a significant reaction in asset markets. Alternative C, page 8, may appeal to those of you who are convinced that first-quarter growth was held down almost entirely by transitory factors and that the underlying pace of economic expansion remains sufficient to eliminate labor market slack relatively quickly.  You may also see the recent firming in inflation as likely to be more persistent than the staff, or may be concerned that continuing asset purchases well into the fall and keeping the funds rate at its effective lower bound well into next year could pose risks to inflation or to financial stability.  These views may lead you to want to taper asset purchases more rapidly and, by doing so, signal that liftoff is likely to occur earlier than markets now expect. Like that for alternative B, the statement for alternative C begins by indicating that economic activity has rebounded in recent months.  However, it is more upbeat than alternative B in noting that labor market indicators have shown “broad further improvement,” and introduces more expansive language characterizing payroll employment, as well as the unemployment rate and other measures, as indicating that “underutilization of labor resources remains.” It is also more positive in its description of business fixed investment and inflation.  The third paragraph announces a larger reduction in the pace of asset purchases, while the fourth suggests that there could be a similarly large reduction in the future. A statement along the lines of alternative C would surprise investors and would likely cause them to pull forward the expected timing of the first rate hike and might lead them to anticipate a steeper subsequent path of the funds rate as well.  Longer-term interest rates likely would rise, equity prices fall, and the dollar appreciate. Finally, alternative A on page 4 may appeal to policymakers who view the sequence of downward revisions to first-quarter GDP as casting doubt on whether the current rebound in economic activity marks a return to sustained above-trend economic growth, or who are concerned that inflation might not return to 2 percent anytime soon without additional monetary accommodation.  Such policymakers may want to continue asset purchases at their current pace for now to await further information concerning the economic outlook, labor market conditions, and inflation; they may also want to strengthen the forward guidance. The first and second paragraphs of alternative A are more tentative about the recent economic news and the outlook for inflation than their counterparts in alternative B.  The third paragraph refers to increased uncertainty about the economic outlook as justification for a decision to maintain the current pace of purchases until more information on the outlook is available.  And the fifth paragraph strengthens the forward guidance for the federal funds rate by adding an inflation floor. An announcement along the lines of alternative A would come as a considerable surprise to market participants, likely leading them to mark up their expectations for total asset purchases, perhaps by a considerable amount, and to push back their anticipated timing of liftoff.  Interest rates would fall and the dollar could depreciate. Equity prices could rise or fall depending on the size of the negative signal that investors took from the statement about the economic outlook. Draft directives for these alternatives are presented on pages 11 through 13 of your handout.  Thank you.  That completes my prepared remarks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Questions for Bill.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is providing information about different alternatives for monetary policy without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 362.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had a comment and a question.  The comment is that I found these charts about the median dealer purchase expectations and the expected path of the fed funds rate to be useful.  It would be, I think, also informative to be presenting information about the distribution of beliefs as well.  I think it would be slightly helpful in getting after some of the concerns about low volatility that we’ve been hearing, because you’d be getting a little bit of a picture of the distribution of beliefs in the market as well as just looking at the median.  That’s a comment. The question is about the SEP.  The SEP shows a slight amount of tightening.  What are the staff views on how that would be interpreted by markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 363.
 MR. ENGLISH.  The so-called dot plot shows, as Min described in the briefing yesterday, a little bit higher dots.  The median for 2015 was higher by 12½ basis points, and the one for 2016 by 25 basis points.  I think, as we have seen in the past, those dots get a lot of attention in markets, and I think it will be read as suggesting a little bit tighter path for policy. I would expect to see some upward movement in market-based measures of expected policy, OIS or whatever, as a result of that.  We will see this afternoon, but I think that’s likely. As I think Simon pointed out in his briefing, the market expectations are a little low relative to your SEP expectations.  Not only are you above, but you’re a little more above, and I think that, again, will push things a little higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the implications of the dot plot and stating their expectation of how it will be interpreted in the markets.


Passage number 364.
 MR. POTTER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This is a specific phrase, "MR. POTTER," and does not provide any context or information to indicate whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 365.
  The market expectations for the dots, you mean, or for— MR. ENGLISH.  Just for policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward exchange between two individuals discussing market expectations for policy.


Passage number 366.
 MR. POTTER.  I think that we do ask a lot of questions about how concentrated the beliefs are. There is close to a 100 percent belief that you will reduce asset purchases by$10 billion at this meeting  There is much less certainty about when liftoff will be, though, if you ask that question. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage simply states two different levels of certainty about two different topics. There is no clear disagreement or contention between Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 367.
 MR. EVANS.  Related to this, would the market take any signal away from an inference that the dots are higher because existing participants have adjusted their forecast as opposed to the changing composition of the Committee, and that, by itself, could lead to shift in the dots.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement expressed in the passage as Mr. Evans is suggesting that the market may interpret the increase in the dots as a result of existing participants adjusting their forecast rather than the changing composition of the Committee. This implies that there may be different perspectives on the factors influencing the increase in the dots.


Passage number 368.
 MR. ENGLISH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 369.
  It’s hard to know what market participants will believe, but— MR. EVANS.  I’m just asking for speculation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their uncertainty about the beliefs of market participants and then asks for speculation.


Passage number 370.
 MR. ENGLISH. —they are certainly aware that there has been a change in composition, and I would expect them to think there is at least a reasonable probability that the change in composition has contributed to the move up in the dots.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. English about the awareness and expectations of others regarding a change in composition.


Passage number 371.
 MR. POTTER. We asked a question about the dots, and some of the answers said it’s hard to work out because there are new people on the FOMC. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Potter brings up a question, and Chair Yellen responds without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 372.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Here’s a two-hander. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both parties agree that there is something being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 373.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s not obvious, though, if the dots change because the composition changed, that it doesn’t matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be a disagreement about whether the change in composition affects the significance of the changing dots.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 374.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Oh, absolutely.  No, no.  I would think it would be the reverse in some sense.  It would matter if they thought that, for example, the change in composition had moved the center of the Committee in a particular way.  That would matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: Mr. English initially claims that he agrees with something, but then contradicts himself by stating the opposite opinion. This contradictory response indicates disagreement or contention.


Passage number 375.
 MR. POTTER.  The big issue is, they try to put names on each dot, and that makes it harder for them to work out the particular names they might be interested in when you add people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement about a perceived difficulty in identifying specific names when adding more people.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 376.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Isn’t there a slight offset, Bill, too, though, because the long-term equilibrium fed funds rate has come down slightly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement. The speaker is questioning Bill's statement and suggesting that there might be a slight offset in the long-term equilibrium fed funds rate.


Passage number 377.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I’m not sure if that is an offset.  I guess it’s an offset in terms of what should happen to longer-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. English, states his uncertainty about whether something is an offset and expresses his understanding of it in relation to longer-term rates.


Passage number 378.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Right.  That’s what I mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple acknowledgement and clarification of understanding.


Passage number 379.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I don’t think it’s an offset in terms of what should happen to expectations through the funds rate over the next few years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 380.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with that. CHAIR YELLEN.  A two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 381.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  I just wanted to underscore the point the Vice Chairman just made.  This goes to how we all talk about this publicly.  Of course, you’ll have the first chance, Madam Chair, to do that.  I think emphasizing that this comes from composition could really lead markets at that point to be thinking that this represents a change in the Committee’s reaction function.  That carries with it certain risks I think. And just to follow up on the comment I had made about the distribution.  It’s not just about how much a particular individual believes in the forecast he or she offers, it’s also about the distribution of beliefs for the period ahead—just to clarify what I was trying to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is simply emphasizing a point that the Vice Chairman made and adding his own thoughts on how to communicate the message effectively to the markets. He also clarifies his previous comment about the distribution of beliefs.


Passage number 382.
 MR. POTTER.  Certainly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Certainly" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It implies agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 383.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  A two-hander, President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "A two-hander, President Mester" does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 384.
   MS. MESTER.  Yes.  I just wanted to offer that my interpretation is if you look at 2015 unemployment rates, that forecast has been revised down a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an individual's interpretation of a situation.


Passage number 385.
  I mean, you can point to economic conditions as being a factor in sort of— MR. ENGLISH.  That’s right, but inflation was also marked down.  If you apply kind of a Taylor (1999) rule to the individual contributions, and look at what those might have implied about the distribution of dots in 2016, say, you can’t explain the movement of the dots.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement and the other person agrees by saying "That's right."


Passage number 386.
 MS. MESTER.  The 2015 inflation central tendency was not marked down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement provided is a straightforward assertion without any opposing or conflicting views.


Passage number 387.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That’s right. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions for Bill.  [No response]  Seeing none, and before we begin our policy go-round, I’d like to raise an issue with you.  A few of you have mentioned to me that you think the time has come to clarify for the public the likely timing of the cessation of asset purchases, assuming we stay on the path of reducing asset purchases. In particular, assuming the economy continues to progress along the lines we are anticipating, do we intend to bring the purchase program to a close at our October meeting with a $15 billion reduction in the pace of purchases, or do we, instead, intend to make another measured $10 billion reduction in October, and bring the program to a conclusion after the December meeting with a $5 billion reduction. Now, I have been asked this question, and several of you have mentioned to me that you have as well.  I just want to say that I’m sympathetic to the view that it would be worthwhile to clarify this point sooner rather than later.  I worry that the longer we wait to say something about this final step in the program, and the more we respond by saying that the Committee hasn’t yet decided, the larger this will loom in the minds of investors.  They may think that we see this as a very meaningful decision, and when the decision comes, it will be seen as a significant statement  about our assessment of the economic outlook and the likely timing of interest rate increases, even though, in macroeconomic terms, it just is not a substantive issue at all. I like the idea of getting our decision on this out to the public soon.  One way to do this would be to include something in our statement today, and I know there are arguments in favor of such an approach.  But, I confess, it is not my personal preference.  I think that just adding a sentence, for example, to paragraph 4 that clarifies this, without providing any context, and in a statement that is otherwise notable for its absence of red ink, might well be read as saying something significant about our sense of the outlook.  So, in today’s statement, if we were to make such an addition, it will really stand out.  Moreover, providing detail about the end of the purchase program could also encourage the view that our purchases are on a preset course, which I think is wrong.  Using the statement to convey this information could have effects on policy expectations that I think would be unwelcome. On the other hand, I think it’s highly likely that I will get a question on this topic at the press conference this afternoon.  My preference would be to actually answer that question, but I would do so in a way that provides the context that this is a decision that is not meaningful from a substantive point of view, that it does not have implications for our intentions regarding liftoff, which will hinge on our evolving expectations concerning our actual and expected progress in achieving our objectives, and that our purchases remain data-dependent. Of course, before doing so, I absolutely want to make sure that you would be comfortable with this approach, and also to get your views on when it would be better to end the program, assuming that we do continue to reduce the pace of purchases.  My personal preference would be to go with a final step-down in the pace of purchases of $15 billion at the October meeting in order to avoid having the minimal purchases that would otherwise continue through December.  I think that would gain undue focus and attention, but I am completely open to your views on this question. In your contributions during the go-round, I would appreciate it if you would indicate what your preferences are on the policy issue—namely, should the final reduction be $15 billion or $5 billion. Also, I’d like to hear your views on the communications issue.  Are you comfortable with my providing this information at the press conference, assuming the appropriate question is asked.  And if, to our surprise, there is no such question, this issue could, in any case, be covered in the minutes with the appropriate context provided. Does anyone have any particular questions on that.  Otherwise, we can begin the go-round, and I’d just appreciate your comments on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Chair Yellen is seeking input and opinions from the group, but there is no indication of disagreement or opposition to her suggestions.


Passage number 388.
 MR. LACKER.  Can we step down $25 billion in September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is a straightforward question without any indication of disagreement or opposing opinions.


Passage number 389.
 MR. FISHER.  Don’t push it, Jeff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Fisher simply warns Jeff not to push a certain matter.


Passage number 390.
  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s not in the feasible set. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 391.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  With regard to your question, I agree with the suggestion you’ve made as to how you wish to handle this matter.  My preference personally, of course, is—and I’ve said this in speeches publicly—that we close off this program in October with the final $15 billion, and I’m happy to hear President Kocherlakota, although he has a personal preference to put it in the statement, to have a fallback, accepting that you handle this in the press conference. I would like to suggest that that is the best way to proceed, and I’m sure you’ll handle it just right.  I do think it’s important to emphasize the fact that from a macroeconomic standpoint,  this is not a significant factor, as you expressed.  I fully support the way you suggested it be handled, and I would also say with regard to the ownership issue, the Chair speaks for the Committee, and from my standpoint as a close observer, I would say that the Chair has done a very good job of reflecting the Committee’s views rather than exerting any individual views, and I know you’ll continue to do so. With regard to alternative B, I would suggest no changes.  I like it the way it’s written.  The sentence, “the unemployment rate, though lower, remains elevated”—Bill and I have talked about this, of course, and eventually if we continue to see improvement there, we might want to migrate to the language that we have in alternative C, paragraph 1, but for now I think it’s fine the way it is. I want to conclude with a little apology here as to the way I stated myself yesterday.  Just to be clear, I think I was pretty straightforward.  I don’t embrace the suggestion that overshooting full employment is necessary if we’re to get inflation up to target.  Indeed, as I said, I consider this the opposite of benign.  But one thing I do at this table is I watch body language, and I ask Evan Koenig behind me to always watch the body language while I speak, and I noticed that Mr. Wilcox drew up to full seated height, which when he’s seated is higher than I am when I’m standing.  I may have given offense.  I apologize.  As you said, Madam Chair, none of us want to repeat the experience of the 1970s.  I may have gone too far, and if I, watching your body language, David, if I gave you or the staff any offense with regard to that paper, I apologize. I want to make it clear that if you look at my own SEP submissions, I actually expect inflation to be a little bit above 2 percent in 2017.  My SEP forecast just had a bit of a rate overshoot, and on the unemployment side my estimate for the natural rate is 5½ percent.  I don’t  mind a little overshoot as long as it doesn’t become endemic, and I want to make that clear.  But I also stress in my submission the need for tightening in 2015 and 2016 to contain that overshoot. Now, I made a suggestion yesterday alongside of an inference made by President Rosengren, which obviously went nowhere, but I want to just spend a minute on that.  This goes back to the issue of low volatility, and I’m very happy that Governor Powell has stressed financial issues.  I’ve spoken about this very low VIX matter for quite some time, both publicly and in this forum, but the suggestion was that if the economy keeps developing in the way we see it, that a gentler form of tightening before we actually raise the base rate would be to taper down our repurchases. The market is so complacent—for example, British interest rates are the lowest they’ve been since the 17th century.  In our case, it’s at least 50 years and perhaps longer.  All of the indicators that Governor Powell mentioned I have spoken of before, and he put a little more muscle behind it, but I do think the markets are very, very tender.  I’d like the Committee to consider along the lines of what I suggested, and I believe Mr. Rosengren was suggesting, that it might be a gentler form of signaling to the market that as we get more confidence, we consider tapering reinvestments.  I was going to say we were seeing green shoots, but I’m not going to use that terminology ever again.  We’ve disabused that before, but before we get to the full bloom of summer and liftoff—I don’t want to leave that off the table.  I’d like to keep it on the table, but I just view it against the background of financial complacency, that that might be a gentler way to tighten than actually raising the base rate until we’re fully confident.  As I said yesterday, I want to see the whites of the eyes of everything we wanted to see before we raise the base rate.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 392.
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  The minimalist approach to changing the statement makes eminent sense at a time when we are providing a gradual, transparent, and predictable path to the taper program.  The weakness in the real economy in the first half of this year, coupled with our “steady as she goes” taper communications strategy, successfully avoided significant increases in interest rates or increased volatility, either of which might have further disrupted the recovery. Exit strategies can be difficult to maneuver even with a less complicated set of tools. The lessons I take from the four predictable taperings to date, based in part on the positive market response, is that our experience with the gradual and predictable slowing in balance sheet increases may be instructive when we begin to reduce our balance sheet.  To be explicit, when it becomes appropriate to reduce the size of our balance sheet, we may choose to do so gradually and predictably with the actual timing and size of tapered reductions depending on how the economy evolves. In terms of the two questions that you posed, I am fine with ending the purchases as you suggest—$5 billion on a $4 trillion balance sheet is the definition of rounding error.  As a result, I don’t view it as a policy statement or a policy view.  I think it’s a technical adjustment.  As a result, I don’t think it belongs in the statement.  I actually think that it should be in response to a question and more seem like an offhand remark because I think that’s probably what it deserves.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any significant contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker expressing their support for alternative B and discussing their views on tapering and balance sheet reduction. There is no clear disagreement or conflicting views presented.


Passage number 393.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  I think the proposed statement is satisfactory as presented.  Like the previous meeting, I favor a minimalist approach, the least possible drama this time around. On the question you posed, I really don’t think it’s a big deal one way or the other, but I’ll make the case for two final steps, October and December.  The reason would be that putting it off until December might delay the starting of the considerable period clock in the minds of some people in the market, particularly those who are not listening and who are locked into a six-month view.  I don’t think it’s a big deal, but, on balance, I would favor, as President Kocherlakota did, doing this in December.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lockhart expresses his support for alternative B and agrees with the proposed statement. He also shares his opinion on the timing of two final steps, but states that he doesn't think it's a big deal and acknowledges that President Kocherlakota also favored doing it in December.


Passage number 394.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written, to continue the taper.  I support an October concluding taper of $15 billion as you suggested, although we are not on a preset course.  [Laughter]  Stating this at the press conference is perfectly fine, in my opinion. Just to be clear, my assumption for appropriate monetary policy in my SEP submission is liftoff in the first quarter of 2016 with a shallow path of tightening thereafter, and my long-run nominal federal funds rate is at 3¾ percent.  I think inflation and inflation pressures remain low.  I think they are low for the PCE.  I think they are low for the CPI.  I think they are low around the world.  President Kocherlakota’s comments are important here.  I think we should vigorously support ending our below-inflation-target performance, which by some measures we have experienced since 2008 on core PCE. My preferred policy rate liftoff is delayed until I have high confidence that one-year-ahead inflation is at least at our target, and is sustainable thereafter.  It would be very helpful to increase our discussion publicly of associated compensation growth that supports sustainable inflation at the target.  For instance, as you mentioned, Madam Chair, nominal wage growth of average productivity growth plus an inflation objective sounds right to me.  That’s 1½ percent plus 2 percent.  That’s 3½ percent, and we’re well under that. We have a ways to go on this front, and I think that if wages started to move up in line with that that would be associated with sustainable inflation at our objective. Without this type of steady-state wage growth, it’s difficult for me to believe that inflation is going to be at our target, at least sustainably.Let me close by highlighting a little-discussed risk that we could face.  Once we begin raising rates, I think our worst dilemma will be if inflation falls and is below our inflation objective and remains below our inflation objective.  We know how to deal with inflation above our target.  A premature fiat tightening, like the Bank of Japan and the ECB have done over time, will quickly ratify a return to the zero lower bound challenges that we desperately need to get away from.  Our first priority should be to exit the zero lower bound organically, as quickly as possible. I think it’s too early to begin thinking we can return to a “business as usual” central banking attitude.  Like I said, we know how to deal with inflation if it’s above our target.  We need to focus on goal-oriented monetary policy for our dual mandate objectives.  I think it’s better to err on the side of getting away from the zero lower bound.  If we put a lot of hope on threading the needle to exit the zero lower bound, we risk falling back.  I agree with President Kocherlakota’s sentiment that we need to put more weight on getting to the inflation objective sustainably as the unemployment rate falls and with nominal compensation growth rising closer to 3½ percent.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for alternative B, the tapering of monetary policy, and shares their views on inflation and inflation pressures. They also agree with President Kocherlakota's comments and highlight the need to exit the zero lower bound.


Passage number 395.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 396.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would like to start with an apology to Vice Chairman Dudley.  Normally, when one of the major sports franchises in my District is in a championship, I reach out to my colleague in the other District to make a small wager.  Unfortunately, with the Stanley Cup Finals coming up, with the L.A. Kings playing the New York Rangers, I was traveling at the time, and I didn’t actually reach out to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is apologizing for not reaching out to the Vice Chairman to make a friendly wager due to travel circumstances.


Passage number 397.
  By the time I came—  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m happy.  I’m happy that you didn’t, in view of how it all turned out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their happiness about a situation, indicating that they are satisfied with the outcome. There is no indication of any conflicting opinions or disagreement.


Passage number 398.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without a specific passage to refer to, I am unable to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Could you please provide the passage you'd like me to analyze?


Passage number 399.
 WILLIAMS.  By the time I came home, it was already over.  [Laughter]  Again, I apologize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The laughter suggests that the speaker's comment is meant as a joke or a lighthearted remark.


Passage number 400.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you for that" is simply expressing gratitude and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 401.
 MR. FISHER.  President Lockhart and I could have had the same deal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that President Lockhart and Mr. Fisher could have negotiated the same deal.


Passage number 402.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the passage itself. Please provide the specific passage for evaluation.


Passage number 403.
 WILLIAMS.  I support alternative B as written.  Recent data confirm that the first-quarter drop is an anomaly and point to the reemergence of moderate growth.  Of course, substantial labor market slack persists, and inflation remains below our longer-run target, and these circumstances call for maintaining the current course of policy.  This includes a further measured reduction in the pace of asset purchases, combined with forward guidance that signals a highly accommodative future path for the funds rate.  The judicious wording changes in alternative B properly leave the first quarter behind while highlighting policy continuity. Madam Chair, with regard to the October ending of the asset purchases, I agree with your approach completely.  I don’t think this is a governance issue.  You actually invited all of us to opine on that, and I do think putting it in the statement would potentially lead to the public misconstruing the message there.  I agree completely with how President Rosengren put this— you really want this to be just a minor technical issue, so I agree with the approach that you have suggested on that at the press conference. I do want to mention an issue looking further ahead from our policy decisions today, and obviously our main challenge is going to be managing the normalization of policy while minimizing unnecessary disruptions in financial markets.  Our discussions yesterday focused on the operational issues, so these are obviously very important.  I would like to take this opportunity to highlight an additional challenge relating to the global monetary policy environment.  I recently returned from visits to four foreign countries: South Korea, Japan, Germany, and Texas.  [Laughter]  And my visits to Japan and Germany were just an apt reminder of the divergent paths that the major central banks of the world are taking in terms of monetary policy currently and over the next couple of years.  Both the Bank of Japan and the ECB are in the early stages of sizable and prolonged expansions of monetary accommodation.  My own view is that these steps are entirely appropriate, and I am encouraged by the signs of progress in escaping deflation in Japan.  However, I foresee a tug of war in global financial markets as we and the Bank of England withdraw monetary accommodation at the same time that the ECB and the Bank of Japan are adding massively to accommodation. As research on the effects of QE has shown, policy actions in one major economy spill over to the financial conditions, especially interest rates and exchange rates, in other countries.  This came up in the primary dealer survey as one of the factors—the policy actions of other countries—that explain why interest rates have been coming down globally, and we know this.  But this divergence in the policy direction across the globe will add an additional dimension that may complicate our task of achieving the appropriate set of financial conditions supportive of our employment and price stability goals in the period ahead.  In addition, it may exacerbate carry trade, reach-for-yield, and short-term capital flows with financial-stability implications. Now, I mention this issue not with some goal of advocating a particular policy, but, rather, to highlight this issue as one we should have on our radar screen and one we should be including and accounting for in our analysis involving future financial conditions.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and agreeing with the approach taken by the Chair. They also mention an additional challenge related to global monetary policy, but they do not take a stance on a particular policy.


Passage number 404.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B today.  The FOMC has signaled that it would take a significant change to the outlook before it would deviate from the path of reducing asset purchases by $10 billion per meeting. While there are risks and uncertainty, economic developments suggest our forecast remains largely intact.  Growth is expected to rise over the forecast horizon with employment increasing and inflation moving gradually back to our goal.  Thus, I believe we should continue on the policy path the Committee has laid out and reduce monthly purchases by another $10 billion. Regarding the ambiguity about whether our purchases will end in October or December if we keep on our tapering path, I agree with the Chair that this is really immaterial from an economic point of view.  Hence, I have no strong preferences for October or December.  Rather than clarify the ambiguity in the statement, which would elevate its importance, I support the Chair’s proposal to do this in the press conference, and I guess I would say if you’re confident you’re going to get the question, fine.  If you think there’s some possibility the question won’t come up, then I would just suggest doing it in your prepared remarks to clarify the ambiguity and get the issue off the table. Turning to language, I have no problem with the statement as written in alternative B. My preference is to make minimal changes today, but with the end of purchases looming and with rate increases anticipated sometime next year, provided the economy evolves as anticipated, I believe it will very soon be time to change the guidance indicating that liftoff will be a considerable time after the asset purchases end. My preference would be to replace this language with state-contingent language, although, given the history of the language, I understand this to be an aspirational goal.   To the extent our policy is forward looking and liftoff is tied to the outlook, perhaps examining the SEP—although I realize that may be a dirty word—either the data that we just collected or a follow-up to it, may give us more understanding of the conditions that Committee participants see at the time of liftoff.  In any case, it would seem prudent to come up with language alternatives for consideration sooner rather than later.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and agrees with the Chair's proposal to clarify ambiguity in a press conference. They also express a preference for minimal changes and suggest considering state-contingent language for guidance on liftoff. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention with the views expressed.


Passage number 405.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B in terms of a further reduction in asset purchases.  The labor market has shown meaningful improvement, and inflation, both realized and expected, has increased.  The current 1.6 percent year-over-year rate of inflation, along with the projection from the Survey of Professional Forecasters that it will be 1.9 percent next year, suggests that inflation dynamics are generally aligned with our 2 percent goal. As the economy improves, I have been particularly interested in looking at the various policy prescriptions in Tealbook and to what extent they deviate from the current stance of our policy.  In particular, a footnote in Tealbook B, noted that those deviations have persisted even as the intercepts in the policy rules have been adjusted to reflect the Board staff’s downward revisions to the long-run real fed funds rate.  I also noted that the Tealbook-consistent measure of r* is also now 35 basis points above the actual real fed funds rate, which is the widest, most accommodative spread since the end of the crisis.  These rules suggest to me that we may need to consider preparing markets for liftoff possibly earlier than currently expected in order to be most consistent with a data-dependent policy and to minimize potential adverse effects of a reach for yield, as highlighted by Governor Powell. Regarding communication about the end of asset purchases, I support the $15 billion in October and that you use the press conference as an opportunity to communicate that, and I assume our minutes would, of course, reflect that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. George, expresses her support for alternative B and shares her analysis of the labor market, inflation dynamics, policy prescriptions, and the need for communication about the end of asset purchases.


Passage number 406.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  I support reducing purchases $15 billion in October.  I’d suggest we put it in the minutes and you respond to a question about it by being forthcoming.  I’d suggest that you don’t put it in the prepared statement.  It’s a little ambiguous what it means for the Chair to put a policy pronouncement in the prepared statement that isn’t in the Committee statement.  I think we had trouble with that last June. I guess more broadly, an observation on some of the earlier discussion today, by Governor Powell and others.  I take it for granted that our first policy signals are going to generate an increase in volatility.  To me it’s not obvious that, per se, that would be a problem we need to solve.  I think we should expect the normal market reaction to be an increase in volatility.  I can picture increases in volatility that we would view as problematic, as symptoms of miscommunication or of us adding more unintended uncertainty about the future, but I can also picture volatility going up in ways that we ought to expect and sort of welcome.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply expressing his support for alternative B and offering suggestions for how the Chair should communicate that support. He also offers an observation on earlier discussions but does not express disagreement with them.


Passage number 407.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  I also support your proposal about the press conference.  It may be the only major news of the day, because this time there’s not any suspense about whether we should continue with the program.  The advice you’ve received to treat it in a very matter-of-fact way seems to me to be about right.  I’d just like to pick up, in addition to that, on something that President Plosser said looking at paragraph 6 of alternative B.  I think that, President Plosser, if you go to the last sentence that you object to, there are two ways of looking at it, and there’s an ambiguity about what is normal in the longer run.  If you took the “-er” off “longer,” then the statement would be “normal in the long run,” then it’s pretty straightforward that that will be the case.  I don’t know what “normal” is for a longer time path, and it just seems ambiguous. Alternatively, for when we do this next time, we could just say economic—“near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions are likely to warrant a gradual approach to the long-run target federal funds rate.” But I think those would both deal with that, if we want to do it, whenever.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker supports alternative B and agrees with the proposal about the press conference. The speaker also agrees with the advice to treat the matter in a matter-of-fact way. The only point of discussion is about the wording in paragraph 6 of alternative B, but there is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 408.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written; I am fine with your proposed way of handling the last chunk of the taper. I do think President Lockhart makes an important point.  I’m not sure how much can be done about it though, which is that a lot of the world out there is even less state-contingent than we are and they are driven by the calendar, and for a lot of people, the last chunk of tapering will flip a switch that’s more or less six, seven, or eight months.  Although we can all, I hope, confirm that nothing is on a preset path, I think we probably should expect that there is going to be a little bit of reaction there.  But I think it’s sensible to handle it as you proposed, and I agree with Eric, John, and Richard that it actually would not be a good idea to have it in the statement because that would elevate it too much.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and agrees with the proposed way of handling the last chunk of the taper. They also agree with other speakers that it would not be a good idea to have the last chunk of the taper in the statement.


Passage number 409.
  MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written, and I’m very comfortable with your approach on October, of saying that we will cut $15 billion in October and handling it as a question or in the minutes. In a sense, the normalization process effectively began one year ago at this meeting when the Committee first officially socialized with the public the idea that quantitative easing might not go on forever, resulting in the well-known taper tantrum.  This is the first normalization cycle in 10 years, I think, and if I counted correctly, it’s the eighth one of my adult life, but it’s the first one I will have experienced inside these walls.  I’ve been thinking about ways to learn more about the process and different ways to think about it.  For me, the starting point is the Tealbook baseline, which represents for me an acceptable modal outlook and a policy framework that brings the economy to full employment and our inflation objective in a reasonable period of time; in the case of inflation, not as fast as desired. Beyond that, it also seems to me useful to learn from the taper, as President Rosengren suggested and others, too, I think, and also to understand how past Committees have approached the problem and think further, in addition, about the risks to the forecast and the loss function you might apply to those risks if realized.  As a result of all that, working with the Board staff, I’ve started to look at earlier tightening cycles to see what light they might shed, and market participants and commentators are out there doing exactly the same thing.  For example, I met with Board staff and also with a hedge fund a couple of weeks ago that had looked at the previous seven policy normalization cycles and found a clear pattern under which the increase in long-term rates in a tightening cycle has increasingly taken place before the FOMC’s first actual rate hike, which I think sheds some light and helps make some sense on last summer’s taper tantrum.  It also makes the long-end rally of the first half of this year look even more oddly  timed, and maybe I’ll take this opportunity to comment on President Lacker’s comment.  I fully agree that it would be healthy to see a return to higher levels of volatility and higher rates, too, for that matter. Some of you may also have seen the Goldman piece of last week, which looked at the prior three tightening cycles that began in 1994, 1999, and 2004, and I went through those cycles with the help of Board staff with this piece in mind.  In both 1994 and 2004, the Committee’s first rate increase happened at a time when headline unemployment was about ½ percentage point above the staff’s contemporaneous estimate of the natural rate. In today’s forecast, that fits pretty well.  That would suggest liftoff around the time of this meeting next year, which is in line with the baseline forecast of Q2.  I know this analysis is based on two data points. Interestingly to me, in 1999, the Committee didn’t tighten until unemployment was nearly a full percentage point below the staff’s estimate of the natural rate.  The special circumstances then, as we all know, I suspect, were persistent low inflation of below 1½ percent for both core and headline PCE associated with the well-known IT-driven productivity gains.  And there are obvious special circumstances here today: Inflation is unusually low and it’s further below target than in any of these prior tightening cycles and expected to remain so; and there’s also the general specialness of this era in which a damaged economy is slowly repairing itself.  But these are already baked into our forecast, and our policy rate path is now in line with the optimal control simulations and more accommodative than all of the simple policy rules in Tealbook B, except nominal income targeting.  There’s no obvious message in this for me about liftoff.  Others may see that differently. The bigger question is probably the risks to the modal forecast and the weights one puts on those risks.  I do see a risk of a lower inflation path, as I mentioned earlier. I also see a risk tothe economy from financial conditions.  I guess the relative importance of those risks will depend for me on future developments.  I see this as the early stages of an interesting exercise.  I invite comments outside the bounds of this meeting from anyone interested, and I’ve actually suggested it to folks as perhaps an interesting subject for a presentation at some point.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 410.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  I think there’s a virtue in confirming market expectations of continuity in the policy stance at this juncture, given recent data. I have to say I’m very sympathetic to the risks that were highlighted by President Kocherlakota, having seen them over a period of time in Japan and having alerted my European friends that I thought their policy stance was flirting with dangerously low inflation and causing quite a bit of consternation, but those concerns remain.  I would be comfortable with the proposed addition of the language in paragraph 2, but I don’t feel strongly about that. With regard to the October termination, I think obviously there is a virtue to clarifying at some juncture.  I’m perfectly comfortable with October.  I would be comfortable with the second date as well.  I do believe that given the continuity represented in alternative B this will be viewed as news, and there will be some importance attached to it that perhaps you don’t intend. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Ms. Brainard, expresses support for alternative B and also agrees with the proposed addition of language in paragraph 2. She also expresses comfort with both the October termination date and another proposed date. Overall, there is no evident disagreement or contention in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 411.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  I take President Kocherlakota’s point, but I think making that change in the language at this meeting at a time when inflation looks like it’s actually creeping up, I think people would just have trouble trying to understand what the motivation was for that statement change.  I support the Chair’s proposal in terms of the press conference and the $15 billion taper in October.  I don’t want it in the statement, and I don’t want it in the press conference statement.  I think you want to do it in a low-key way, and if it doesn’t come up—and I’ll be shocked if it doesn’t—it will come up in the minutes, and that will be a fine way to dispose of it. I also have some thoughts about the Taylor rule formulations in Tealbook B.  Not surprisingly, all of them show liftoff occurring either immediately or before year-end.  I think these rules are a very poor guide to policy right now.  These Taylor rules use as their intercept the long-run equilibrium real rate, which has been lowered to 1¾ percent in their latest formulation.  I think they should be using the short-run equilibrium rate, which is likely to be considerably lower.  Why should the short-term equilibrium rate be lower.  Lower because we can identify significant headwinds that almost certainly have lowered the equilibrium real rate. This is evident in the sluggish recovery, for example, that we have seen in the housing sector.  Also lower, though, because of the counterfactual.  If policy were as easy as implied by the current level of real short-term rates relative to the 1¾ percent long-run equilibrium real rate, then the economy should be growing much faster than the trajectory we’ve actually been on. Another issue worth considering with respect to these Taylor rule calculations, if the unemployment rate is artificially or temporarily depressed because of a drop in the participation rate, and if the Taylor rule’s measure of the output gap is based on the unemployment rate, which seems to be the way the staff does it, then it would seem that the Taylor rule formulations understate the output gap because they’re taking on board fully the drop in the unemployment rate, which has been driven in part by the participation rate.  That’s another issue, I think.  The bottom line for me is, I think I’ve said this over and over again, but I’m going to say it one more time.  Be careful not to let these Taylor rule calculations influence your assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy.  Now, we’re obviously not doing that because the Committee supports alternative B and it’s not following the Taylor rule formulation, but I do think these rules are a bit misleading in the current set of circumstances. Finally, let me just talk very, very briefly on reinvestment.  I’m not going to go through all the arguments I made yesterday, but just state two things.  One, the reason why I want to end reinvestment after rather than before liftoff is very simple.  Our priority should be to get off the zero lower bound as soon as possible, consistent with the dual-mandate objectives. While it’s true that, on a model-based basis, ending reinvestment first wouldn’t supposedly do anything to short- and long-term rates, or be very minor, we did an experiment last summer that was supposedly very similar, in terms of the taper tantrum, and we saw not only a very large rise in long-term rates, but we also saw a very significant change in the path of short-term rate expectations.  I don’t think you can model these things.  I think you just see how markets can sometimes react in a very violent way, and so I don’t want to take that risk because if we were to experience that sort of event, we might not be able to get off the zero lower bound as soon as we would if we reversed the order and did the reinvestment later.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Well, thank you all for your input on the issue of how to handle October or December.  As we went around, I think the vast majority of you preferred October and to have me do this in the press conference if it comes up.  I did hear some interest in putting it in the statement, but as I understood it, you were willing to go along with the press conference.  I do agree that there could be some reaction to this, and I will do my very best to minimize it, but I don’t want to downplay the potential for some reaction.  It’s because I expect that that I don’t want to see it in the statement, but I think that’s real. With respect to alternative B, there were a couple of proposals for changes, but I think overwhelmingly in the go-round, what I heard was support to basically leave alternative B as it is with minimal red ink today.  I would propose and put that forward at this point for a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. One member supports alternative B, while another member disagrees and thinks that the Taylor rule formulations are a poor guide to policy. There is also disagreement on whether to include certain statements in the press conference and the meeting minutes.


Passage number 412.
 MR. LUECKE.  The vote will cover alternative B as described on pages 6 and 7 of Bill English’s handout and directive B on page 12 of the handout. Chair Yellen Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Brainard Yes Governor Fischer Yes President Fisher Yes President Kocherlakota Yes President Mester Yes President Plosser Yes Governor Powell Yes Governor Tarullo Yes CHAIR YELLEN.  I guess that’s good.  What do I have to tell you.  Two things.  There are boxed lunches for those of you who would like to have them or are going to take off.  For those of you who are gluttons for punishment, you can watch the press conference in the special study.  The date for the next meeting is Tuesday and Wednesday, July 29 and 30.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a record of individuals voting and a brief mention of logistics for the next meeting.


